--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 14, No 1 (2021), 12 – 24              
 
AN ASSESSMENT OF PROFESSIONAL PERCEPTION ON CONTRACTOR-
RELATED DELAY FACTORS IN PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS 
1 LAWAL Fadila Muhammad, 2 IBRAHIM Emmanuel Chongcicimmi, 1 ABUBAKAR 
Ismail, 1 AYENI Olugbenga & 1 OYELEKE Fauziyya Mojirade 
1Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria 
2Department of Building Covenant University, Ota 
 
Correspondence: fadilaabdallahlawal@gmail.com   
 
ABSTRACT 
Delay in construction project is considered one of the most common problems causing a 
multitude of negative effect on the project and its participating parties.  This study aims to 
assess contractor-related factors contributing to delays  in public construction projects in 
Kaduna metropolis. The study adopted a quantitative research approach through the use of 
structured questionnaire survey. A total of 61 structured questionnaires were distributed to 
construction professionals drawn from various building firms within Kaduna Metropolis.  
Out of 61 distributed questionnaires, 44 were retrieved and analyzed for the study.  A 
descriptive statistical methods encompassing frequency distribution and mean ranking score 
were used to analyzed data collected. The study revealed that rework due to construc tion 
errors, improper or obsolete construction methods, and frequent change of subcontractors 
were identified as the most significant contractor -related delay factors. Also, escalation of 
material prices, conflicts with consultants and owners, and frequent  changes of 
subcontractors were revealed as the most frequently occurring delay factors. Despite these 
challenges, respondents strongly agreed that ensuring availability of resources, employing 
competent project managers, and implementing effective financial management are the most 
effective measures for minimizing contractor -related delays in construction projects.  The 
study concludes that contractor-related delays in public construction projects are primarily 
caused by rework from construction errors, obsolete methods, and frequent subcontractor 
changes. Therefore, the study recommends that addressing these issues through better 
planning, cost management, and effective communication can significantly reduce project 
delays. 
KEYWORDS: Causative factors, Construction projects, Contractor delays, Public projects. 
INTRODUCTION 
Globally, the construction industry plays 
an important role in the national socio -
economic development of a country 
(Khahro, 2018). In Nigeria, the 
construction industry occupies an 
important position in the economy, which 
provides shelter, infrastructure,  and 
development (Oladinrin, 2012). 
Furthermore, Akash and Rum (2011) 
stated that an improvement in the 
economic growth of a country will 
increase the growth of the construction 
industry and at the same time, there will be 
an increasing demand for the construction 
of facilities and buildings.  
According to Adam, Josephson, and 
Lindahl (2017), more than 50% of 
construction projects experience time 
overruns, which ultimately result in 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Lawal et al. 
13 | P a g e  
 
project delays. As noted by Egwim, Alaka, 
Toriola-Coker, Balogun, Ajayi, and 
Oseghale (2017), construction delays are a 
widespread phenomenon and represent 
one of the most significant challenges 
facing the global construction industry. 
Tafesse, (2021) emphasized that delays 
occur in almost every construction project, 
with their extent varying considerably 
from one project to another. Gebrehiwet 
and Luo (2017) defined a “delay” in 
construction as the completion of project 
activities or the overall projec t later than 
the planned or contractually agreed 
schedule. In addition, Odenigbo, Odusami, 
Okolie, and Okafor (2020) described delay 
as the slowing down of work progress 
without a total stoppage of construction, 
which can result in time overruns beyond 
the agreed delivery date. Carvalho, Maués, 
Moreira, and Reis (2021), as well as 
Rashid (2020), noted that delay is a 
common factor leading to multiple adverse 
effects and may occur at any stage of a 
project. Similarly, Isyaku (2020) stated 
that construction delay  refers to the 
situation in which a project is completed 
later than the time specified in the contract. 
Consequently, t he critical problems 
encountered by the construction industry 
in Nigeria are the inability to complete 
projects on the scheduled date, at the 
stipulated cost, and the low quality of work 
(Mamman, 2019). Gandhak and 
Sabihuddin (2014), using average 
responses, showed that factors such as 
building permit approval , changes in 
drawings, incomplete documents  and 
inspection and decision during 
development stages are the most relevant 
causes of delays in a construction project. 
A study by Durdyev and Hosseini (2020) 
revealed that major construction delays 
occur primarily due to corruption and 
bureaucracy, insufficient funding, and 
price fluctuations. The study also 
identified excusable, compensable, 
critical, and concurrent delays as the main 
types affecting Nigerian power 
construction projects. Furthermore, 
differing views between clients and 
contractors regardi ng these delay types 
often lead to disputes and additional 
project setbacks (Durdyev and Hosseini 
2020).  
Consequently, previous studies (Egwim et 
al., (2017) have revealed that contractor -
related factors are major contributors to 
schedule delays in construction projects. 
Fashina and Opti (2020) noted that when 
construction projects experience delays, 
the effects are often detrimental to 
stakeholders. Moreover, the impacts of 
construction delays are considered the 
aftermath of unidentified delay causes 
within a project (Viles, Rudeli, & Santilli, 
2020). These effects typically have a 
significant influence on project delivery 
outcomes. 
Over the years, several conventional 
approaches have been adopted for the 
effective management of construction 
project delays, emphasizing robust 
planning, technological integration, clear 
communication, and financial control 
(Arlota and Werner, 2020).  According to 
Bukar and Ibrahim (2021), developing 
realistic schedules with proper risk 
assessments and contingencies helps 
minimize time overruns. Similarly, the use 
of digital tools such as BIM and IoT 
enhances real-time monitoring and enables 
timely corrective actions (Kiani Mavi and 
Gengatharen, et al. , 2021). Furthermore, 
strong stakeholder collaboration and clear 
contract provisions help reduce disputes 
and coordination issues that often result in 
project delivery delays (Fashina, Omar, 
Sheikh, and Fakunle, 2021). Maintaining 
adequate funding and effective 
governance can serve as a tool for 
managing delay in construction project 
delivery (Celestin, 2020). 
--- PAGE 3 ---
An assessment of professional perception on….. 
14 | P a g e  
 
The persistence of contractor-related delay 
problems in public construction projects 
has become a major setback with far -
reaching consequences for the 
construction industry, organizations, the 
economy, and society, particularly in 
developing countries such  as Nigeria 
(Tafesse, 2021).  According to Durdyev 
(2021), contractor delays remain a 
significant challenge in construction 
projects, often resulting in cost overruns, 
schedule extensions, and reputational 
damage. Previous studies have identified 
several pr imary causes of contractor -
related delays in public construction 
projects, including improper planning, 
poor site management, inadequate 
contractor experience, insufficient owner 
financing and delayed payments for 
completed work, subcontractor -related 
problems, shortages of materials and 
labor, equipment unavailability or failure, 
and lack of effective communication 
among project parties, as well as 
construction-stage errors (Sambasivan & 
Soon, 2007; Muwafaq, Abdel -Monem, & 
EL-Dash, 2020) 
While the need to manage contractor -
related delay factors in public sector 
projects remains a recurring concern in the 
construction industry, there is a growing 
necessity to assess the specific delay issues 
associated with contractors within the 
Nigerian construction industry. Therefore, 
this study aim ed at  to assessing the 
perceptions of construction professionals 
to provide insights into contractor -related 
delay factors that hinder effective project 
delivery. The findings are will serve as a 
guide for ind ustry practitioners in 
formulating strategies and interventions to 
minimize delays, enhance project 
performance, and optimize resource 
utilization. 
 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Construction Project Delay  
Construction projects are required to be 
completed based on the schedule, within 
the stipulated cost, time, quality and under 
safe conditions (Abbasi et al., 2020).  As 
noted by Adam et al. (2017), construction 
project delays remain a persistent and 
critical barrier to project success  despite 
these shared project goals objectives 
among contracting parties .  According to 
Celestin (2020) a construction delay is 
defined as the extension of project 
duration beyond the contractually agreed 
completion date or the originally planned 
timeline. Previous studies ( Masood, Ali, 
Shafique, Shafique, Zafar, Maqsoom  & 
Ullah, 2015; Khahro & Memon, 2018; 
Hasmori, Said, Deraman, Abas, Nagapan, 
Ismail, Khalid & Roslan, 2018; Jayalath & 
Perera, 2019 ) have broadly categorized  
construction project delays into four 
distinct types based on causation and 
liability including excusable delays (e.g., 
natural disasters or "acts of God"), non -
excusable delays (attributable to 
contractor or subcontractor negligence), 
compensable delays (caused by owner -
related actions), and non -compensable 
delays (triggered by third -party or 
sovereign events beyond contractual 
control). Moreover, each of these types of 
delay carries different implications for 
time extensions and financial 
compensation of a construction project. 
Causes of Delay in Public Construction 
Projects 
Delay in construction project management 
is caused by different factors. According 
to Hasmori et al.  (2018). While some 
factors are major and pervasive as reported 
by stakeholders, others are minor, leading 
scholars to prioritize the most prevalent 
issues in their groupings ((Egwim et al., 
2017).  As noted by Ahmed (2015) delay 
related factors are classified into  eleven 