--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 14, No 1, (2021) 36 – 46  
IMPROVISED TECHNIQUES OF EARTH BRICKS STABILISATION WITH 
CASSAVA STARCH 
KHALIL Ismail Muhammad1, MAMMAN Mas’ud 1, GETSO Ibrahim Abdullahi1 
LAWAL Habiba Musa2 
1Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria 
2Department of Building, Nuhu Bamalli Polytechnic, Zaria, Nigeria 
Correspondence: khalismail4ward@gmail.com  
 
ABSTRACT 
Compressed Earth Bricks technology is anchored in an initial concern to provide a new, 
economically and socially relevant response to housing production for the World’s very poor. 
As at now the information fully available on stabilisation of Compressed Stabilised Earth 
Bricks (CSEBs) with alternative materials are on partial replacement of cement but not the 
use of cassava starch alone. This work is aimed at improvising Earth Brick Stabilisation 
techniques with cassava starch as the only binder. The adopted techniques are ‘Instant Dry 
Mix (IDM)’; ‘Delayed Dry Mix (DDM)’; and ‘Cooked Paste Mix (CPM)’. Mechanical 
properties of the specimens were determined after curing for 7, 14 and 28 days. From the 
results of Compaction Characteristics and Compressive Strength of samples at 28days, the 
CPM technique performs best with compressive strength of 2.71N/mm 2, greater than the 
NBRRI minimum requirement of 1.65 N/mm 2 for compressed earth bricks. The volume of 
cassava starch increases when cooked, therefore, it is concluded that CPM process is the 
most appropriate technique of cassava starch bricks (CSBs) stabilisation that  can be cost 
effective in low-cost housing development. Bricks produced using CPM can be applied for 
the construction of walls in low rise buildings with proper protection from dampness as CS 
is susceptible to water. 
KEYWORDS: Alternative materials, Brick, Cassava starch, Housing production, 
Stabilisation. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Compressed stabilised  earth bricks 
(CSEBs) are compressed earth bricks 
(CEBs) made up of soil, water, and a 
binder such as lime or cement to increase 
strength ( Lime, 2001) . CSEBs are 
applicable in various earth structures such 
as houses, garages, workshops, garden 
sheds, and a host of others. ILO-WEP 
(1997), posited that the appropriate 
stabilisation of CEBs requires soil 
containing fine gravel/sand as the skeletal 
frame of the brick, then silt and clay to 
bind the sand particles together while 
stabilisers are then added to control 
expansion, strength and abrasion. 
Stabilisation of soil with chemical binders 
such as cement, involves similar technique 
of mixing soil and binder in dry form first, 
followed by the addition water to produce 
sandcrete blocks and earth bricks. 
CEB technology, as reviewed by GTZ 
(1995), is anchored in an initial concern to 
provide a new, economically and socially 
relevant response to housing production 
for the World’s poor population. The very 
low carbon footprint of CSEB, compared 
to concrete materials and cement stabilised 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Khalil et al.  
37 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
 
bricks, asserted by MecoConcept (2013), 
makes it an ultimate environmentally 
friendly building material. F urther 
stabilisation of CEBs with a binding agent, 
produces CSEB which minimises linear 
expansion that occur when water is added 
to clay fraction and improves strength as 
well as controls abrasion.  
Housing delivery is a major problem 
confronting the underdeveloped world 
with several housing policies put in place 
but without housing delivery. Population 
growth rate in these parts of the world is 
higher than the rate of housing provision 
because the ac tual housing delivery 
processes are not sustainable, (Daramola, 
Alagbe, Aduwo, & Ogbiye, 2013) . 
Challenges of housing in terms of quality 
and quantity as observed by Ibimilua, 
(2011), seem to be the same all over the 
world. The poor have less access to 
housing while the rich have upper hand in 
accessing housing. In rural areas of 
Nigeria, housing is generally inadequate in 
terms of quality, while in urban areas the 
major problem is th at of quantity. 
Enhancing the quality of buildings in rural 
areas requires the upgrading of rural 
building materials such as earth and local 
binders like cassava starch. In urban areas 
where shortage in quantity is experienced, 
developing cheaper but quality materials 
such as CSEBs would go a long way to 
ease the problem (Khalil, 2017). 
Technological advancement has 
contributed to greater productivity and 
lesser construction cost and has even 
reduced the adverse effects of construction 
on the environment in many countries. But 
developing countries are far from the 
benefits of technology t o meet the 
increasing demand of shelter for even the 
low-income population. The United 
Nations Centre for Human Settlements 
(UNCHS) over the past decades, has been 
promoting the development of appropriate, 
energy-efficient and environmentally -
sound constru ction technologies, which 
heavily rely on locally available resources 
(HABITAT, 2008).  The construction 
industry is said to be the backbone of 
national economic and social development 
as revealed by several studies such as  
(HABITAT, 1989) ; (Kerali, 2001)  and 
(Namango., 2006). This is evident during 
the periods of national economic growth 
where construction activities grow more 
rapidly than the economy as a whole.  
Earth, as Gernot (2007)  posited, is a 
naturally available material which is easy 
to use even with low craft and skills. It 
absorbs and desorbs humidity faster to a 
higher extent than any other material; 
produces hardly any environmental 
waste; and balances indoor climate and 
moisture movements creating a healthy 
environment. Earth, according to Anant 
and Murmu (2018), is abundantly 
available in nature , has invariably been 
the major construction material for 
providing housing and other structures 
around the world. Globally, it is estimated 
that one third of the world’s population 
lives in earth buildings acclaimed Little & 
Morton (2001) . These are both modern 
and traditional buildings, which occur in 
most cultures and climates. In Nigeria, the 
basic wall construction material in most 
traditional architectures asserted by 
Egenti, Khatib, & Oloke (2014) , is earth, 
usually arranged in simple low -cost and 
self-help construction methods. 
Several simple publications on selecting 
earth materials and brick presses are 
available around the globe. Wayne (2011), 
sited that some of these publications are 
found with Brick pressing machine 
manufacturers and that the United Nations 
(UN) has simple soils testing information, 
while many universities provide tests for 
soils as well. In addition, soil engineering 
has be en done in laboratories for road 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Improvised techniques.…. 
38 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
 
construction materials which are basically 
the same materials that are good for use in 
walls, floors and arched roofs. All these 
are based on cement, lime, and other 
chemical stabilising agents. As at now no 
information is fully available on processes 
of CSEBs stabilisation with cassava starch 
as an alternative material. 
Cassava starch is an abundant and 
environmentally friendly additive that is 
used as soil stabiliser in mud walls and 
mud construction locally in some areas of 
Nigeria. Khalil (2005) , asserted that 
cassava starch is used in the manufacture 
of conical mud balls (local walling units) 
called ‘tubali’, and also in wall rendering 
as stabiliser in some parts of Northern 
Nigeria. 
According to Pacheco-Torgal & Jalali 
(2012), earth construction has received an 
increased attention by the scientific 
community in the 1990s as illustrated by 
several published research articles when 
compared to decades before then. Earth 
construction has a major expression in 
developing countries and its importance 
can be seen in some of the environmental 
benefits associated with it such as 
economic issues; renewable resource; little 
waste generation; energy conservation; 
minimal carbon dioxide emissions; and 
proper indoor air quality. Little & Morton 
(2001), have established that the principal 
reason for using earth -based materials is 
the excellent sustainability characteristics 
exhibited by these materials. These 
include low carbon emissions, efficient 
use of finite resources, minimising 
pollution, waste, a nd use of benign 
materials, local sourcing and 
biodegradability, but cassava starch cannot 
be applied in much the same way as 
cement in stabilizing soil for bricks 
production. 
Cement is directly added to soil, mixed 
thoroughly before water is added to initiate 
the hydration process that binds soil 
particles together. Hydration does not 
occur when cold water gets in contact with 
cassava starch, therefore it is pertinent that 
brick stabilisation techniques with cassava 
starch (CS), are investigated so as to avail 
scholars and end users with firsthand 
information on its application as soil 
stabiliser. 
  
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Materials 
The materials for this research include 
laterite as the primary material; cassava 
starch as binder; and water. 
                       
                 Plate I: Laterite Soil        Plate II: Cassava Starch Powder              
        
The laterite soil was obtained from a 
borough pit located at Biye in Sabon gari 
local Government Area of Kaduna State. 
The laterite was dried; screened pulverised 
and sieved through the No. 4 sieve (5mm 
aperture size). Cassava starch was 
obtained in granular form from Sabon gari 
market in Zaria, Kaduna State, Nigeria. It 
was washed to remove dirt before 
pulverising and sieving to powder as 
shown in plate II.  
