--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 14, No 1, (2021) 47 – 60 
  
PREVALENCE OF CORRUPTION FORMS IN PUBLIC BUILDING 
PROJECTS 
 
ABDULRAZAQ Abdullahi Taiwo1, ISHAQ Ziyadul Hassan2, ABUBAKAR 
Muawiya2, 
ABDULAZEEZ Abubakar Darda’u2, SULEIMAN Aisha Nana3. 
 
1Building Department, Ladoke Akintola University of Technology, Ogbomosho, 
Nigeria. 
2Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria. 
3Department of Building, Federal Polytechnic, Bida, Nigeria. 
 
Correspondence: ziyadishaq2@gmail.com  
ABSTRACT 
Public building projects are overwhelmed by different forms of corruption. However, 
little or no empirical study assessed the prevalence of corruption forms in public building 
projects. This study, assessed the prevalence of corruption forms in public building 
projects and the stages mostly associated with corruption . The study adopted a 
quantitative research approac h. 68 questionnaires were distributed to contracting and 
consulting organisations who have handled public construction projects using purposive 
sampling technique . Data obtained were analysed using descriptive statistics . Mann-
Whitney U (MWU) test was also used to check the significance of the difference in mean 
scores ratings of the stakeholders’ groups. The study found 
‘Favouritism/Patronage/Nepotism’, ‘Bribery’, and ‘Kickbacks to be the top corruption  
forms prevalent within the public building projects. Stakeholders’ ratings showed that 
‘tendering and bid evaluation’ and ‘contract award’ stages were mostly associated with 
corruption. The Mann -Whitney U (MWU) test result further showed no significant 
difference in the stakeholders’ ratings of the prevalence of corruption forms and the 
stages of procurement mostly affected. The study concludes that corruption forms are 
prevalent in public building projects with ‘tendering and bid evaluation’ stage being the 
most vulnerable. It is recommended  that public procurement officers should strive to 
ensure compliance with the basic principles of public procurement as enshrined in the 
Nigerian public procurement act to minimise occurrences  of corrupt practices , thus, 
ensuring transparent, fair and accountable public building projects procurement. 
KEYWORDS: Corruption Forms,  Prevalence, Public Building Projects,  Public 
Procurement, Procurement Stages. 
INTRODUCTION 
A vibrant and thriving construction 
sector could well drive a healthy and 
well-functioning economy, the sector 
contributes directly to the GDP by 
entering the national accounts as a 
component of fixed investments, and 
fixed investment in turn represents 
addition to the national capital stock 
(Alagidede & Odei -Mensah, 2016). It 
also constantly contributes to 
improvements in the built environments 
of human societies (Transparency 
International, 2016). 
However, corruption has been one of the 
major achilles heel of the construction 
industry globally , with considerable 
assertions indicating  that corruption in 
construction has become a notable 
worldwide challenge confronting all 
countries (Le et al ., 2014). Facts from 
Transparency International (2013, 2016) 
have shown that the construction 
industry has become the most corrupt 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Prevalence of Corruption Forms…….. 
48 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
circle and the procurement sector is also 
stigmatized as being the sector most 
helpless to the frequency of corrupt 
practices owing to the rapid expansion of 
the global construction market after 
entering the 21st century. This is mainly 
ascribed to the fra gmented nature of the 
construction industry (involving clients, 
designers, contractors, consultants and 
suppliers), which inflicts difficulties in 
tracking payment information (Chan & 
Owusu, 2017). (Chan et al. 2017; Owusu 
et.al., 2021) noted that series of research 
on corruption over the last two decades 
has revealed varying corruption forms in 
the studies available and because of the 
evolution of corruption over the years 
different forms of corrupt practices have 
emerged, and more money is being 
expended in these newly generated 
forms. 
The stages in construction process are 
perceived to be very much susceptible to 
corruption from project inception to 
completion. this situation is facilitated 
by high -level political connections in 
awarding contracts, immoderate and 
careless sole sourcing for public 
contracts and contractors’ lack of 
dedication in tackling corruption ( Ogbu 
& Asuquo, 2018; Ameyaw et al., 2017). 
The pervasiveness of different 
corruption forms in the industry cannot 
be under appraised as corruption has 
been a recurring issue abrading million  
in lost resources in al most every sector 
of the economy and the construction 
industry sector is not being left out  
(Agyekum et al., 2020; Adekunle et.al, 
2019).  
Several scholars have recorded practical 
strategic mechanisms to eliminate 
corrupt practices in construction projects 
using frameworks and toolkits, namely 
by: raising public awareness about 
corruption, conducting stringent contract 
monitoring, performing rigorous 
supervision and auditing and 
establishing a high -standard 
accountability mechanism, among 
several others (Ebekozien 2020; Tabish 
& Jha, 201 1; de Jong et al., 2009; Zou, 
2006). According to Ebekozien, (2020) 
and Dza, et al . (2018), public 
procurement due process controls public 
construction projects and fights 
corruption in project planning and 
procurement, promoting procurement 
integrity. Ameh and Odusami (2010) 
opined that the level of corruption and 
unethical practices in the Nigerian 
construction industry is on the decline 
following steps by the BMPIU or the 
‘Due Process Office ‘to block loopholes 
arising from reckless processes involved 
with contract awards and execution at 
the federal level. Nevertheless, from the 
review of several studies, the re are a 
range of views on the prevalence of 
corruption forms as well the stages 
mostly associated with the various 
identified corruption forms in the 
industry. 
Review of several studies (Le  et a l., 
2014; Oyedele, 2018; Owusu et al.,  
2021; Ameyaw, et al., 2013; Ameyaw et 
al. 2017), show a range of views on the 
prevalence of corruption forms as well as 
the stages mostly associated with the 
various identified corruption forms in 
developed and developing countries. 
The prevalence of corruption forms 
could be country specific du e to 
difference in policies applicable to each 
country, however, evidence of such 
empirical studies is limited in the 
Nigerian context. According to Aduwo 
et. al  (2020) and Oyedele (2018), 
Nigerian public sector con struction 
procurement practices are susceptible to 
corruption. This could hinder the 
government’s aim of provision of public 
infrastructure through fair, transparent 
and accountable procurement process.  
Yet, little or no empirical study was 
carried out to determine the corruption 
forms that are prevalent in public 
building projects  in Nigeria and the 
stages mostly associated with 
corruption. Thus, this  research 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Abdulrazaq et al. 
49 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
aims to provide answers to the following 
questions: (1)  What are the  most 
common/prevalent corruption forms  in 
public building projects in Nigeria ? (2) 
Which stage of public building project is 
mostly prone to corruption ? and (3) are 
there significant differences in 
stakeholders’ ratings of the  most 
common/prevalent corruption forms in 
public building projects and the stages of 
public building projects mostly prone to 
corruption?  
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Corruption Forms 
Corruption forms within the construction 
industry exist in many manners, Chan 
and Owusu (2017) identified a total of 28 
different corruption forms the 
construction industry, they include; 
bribery, fraud, collusion, bid rigging, 
embezzlement, kickback, conflict of 
interest, dishonesty, extortion, 
front/shell companies, nepotism, 
professional negligence, cartel, 
favoritism, patronage, guanxi, 
solicitation, facilitation payment, 
lobbying, influence peddling, ghosting, 
deception, money laundering, price 
fixing, intimidation and threats, 
blackmail, coercion and client 
abuse/clientelism. To have a better grasp 
of these corruption forms, they further 
categorized them into six main 
constructs based on (1) the relationship 
and the commonalities that exist among 
the v ariables (by definition) and (2) 
using previous studies that classified 
some of the variables. At the end of the 
classification, the main constructs 
identified were Bribery acts (bribery, 
kickbacks, facilitation payments, 
influence peddling, lobbying and 
solicitation), Fraudulent acts (fraud, 
collusion, front/shell companies, 
dishonesty, ghosting, money laundering 
and deception), Collusive acts (cartels, 
bid rigging and price fixing), 
Discriminatory acts (nepotism, 
favoritism, and patronage), Extortionary 
acts (extortion, client abuse/clientelism, 
intimidations and threats, coercion and 
blackmail), Unclassified acts 
(embezzlement, conflict of interest and 
professional negligence). 
Nature of Public Projects 
Public projects are projects characterized 
by; large investment commitment, vast 
complexity (especially in organizational 
terms) and long -lasting impact on the 
economy, the environment and society 
(Brookes & Locatelli, 2015). Public 
projects are a particul ar class of 
megaprojects that share most of the 
aforementioned characteristics. Most 
megaprojects are often associated with 
poor performance, even in countries with 
low signals of corruption. According to 
Stansbury (2005), not all projects are the 
same: sp ecific features characterize 
projects and make them more or less 
susceptible to corruption.  
These characteristics are: (1) Size: this is 
the most important feature because it is 
easier to hide bribes and inflated claims 
in large projects than in small projects. 
(2) Uniqueness: this makes budget costs 
difficult to compare and therefore it is 
easier to inflate. (3) Government 
involvement: public administrators can 
use their arbitrary power especially 
where there are insufficient controls on 
how government officials behave. (4) 
Number of contractual links: each 
contractual link provides an opportunit y 
for someone to pay a bribe in exchange 
for the contract award. (5) Project 
complexity: when projects are very 
complex, factors like mismanagement or 
poor design can hide bribes and inflate 
claims. (6) Lack of frequency of 
projects: winning these projects  may be 
critical to the survival or profitability of 
contractors, which provides an incentive 
for contractors to use bribes. (7) Work is 
concealed: subsequent processes cover 
the basic components of the work. The 
quality of the components can be very 
costly or difficult to check. (8) 