--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 17. No 1, (2024). 1 – 15                        
 
AN ASSESSMENT OF IT TOOLS REQUIRED FOR DIGITAL 
TRANSFORMATION OF GSCM PROCESSES IN THE NIGERIAN 
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY 
BELLO Amina Sani1, ABDULLAHI Muhammad1, AHMADU Hassan Adavariku1, 
ABUBAKAR Muawiya2, SANI Amina Bashir1. 
1Department of Quantity Surveying, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria 
2Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria 
 
Correspondence: ammabee615@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
Green Supply Chain Management (GSCM) is poised to be instrumental in guiding the 
construction sector toward more environmentally sustainable practices. As the industry 
increasingly embraces digital tools to automate supply chain processes, there is a growi ng 
necessity to integrate GSCM principles. This shift not only enhances operational efficiency 
but also aligns with the broader goal of fostering sustainability within construction practices. 
Hence, this study is aimed at assessing GSCM processes in construction and tool s required 
for digital transformation. To achieve this, a quantitative approach was adopted. A total of 
398 questionnaires were sent to construction professionals in Nigeria, through purposive 
sampling. The data obtained from the survey was analy zed using descriptive statistics, 
specifically means and percentages.  The results revealed “Green construction ( 4.30) to be 
the most applied process, followed by Green Procurement ( 4.26) and Green Design (4.26). 
The study also revealed the most important tools for digital transformation of the processes 
in GSCM to be: BIM (4.10), Blockchain technology (3.96) and RFID with IOT sensors (3.86). 
The study recommends that Organizations should leverage the digital transformation tools 
that are essential for advancing sustainable practices in the construction industry by 
optimizing operations and fostering greater accountability throughout the supply chain. 
KEYWORDS: Construction, Digital Transformation, GSCM, IT tools, Nigeria, Processes 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Climate change, driven by rising greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions and resource depletion, 
presents one of the most significant 
challenges of the twenty -first century 
(UNEP, 2010). The construction sector is a 
major contributor to this crisis, accounting 
for approximately one-third of global carbon 
emissions, one-third of global resource 
consumption, 40% of the world’s energy 
consumption, 40% of global waste generated, 
and 25% of total water consumption  (Wang 
et al. 2022 ). In response to these 
environmental ch allenges, Green Supply 
Chain Management (GSCM) has been 
adopted in the construction industry to 
mitigate these impacts. According to Ali et al. 
(2023), GSCM streamlines supply chain 
processes and promotes sustainable practices 
that significantly reduce the environmental 
footprint of construction activities. 
Digital transformation is revolutioni sing 
various industries, with the construction 
sector at the forefront. As noted by 
--- PAGE 2 ---
An assessment of IT tools…..  
2 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
Samuelson and Stehn (2023), the 
construction industry faces unique 
challenges, such as fragmentation and a 
project-based structure, which necessitate 
innovative approaches to enhance 
operational efficiency and sustainability. 
Lerman et al. (2022) opined that t he 
integration of digital tools into GSCM 
processes is vital for addressing these 
challenges, optimising resource utilisation, 
and minimising environmental impacts . 
Recent studies underscore the importance of 
adopting digital procurement platforms, 
supply chain management software, and IoT 
technologies to streamline operations  
(Attaran, 2020;  Althabatah et al., 2023; 
Ikevuje et al., 2024) . For example, a report 
from The Build Chain highlights how 
contractors like Rasico Construction and 
THB have successfully leveraged digital 
procurement platforms to improve material 
sourcing processes, achieving significant 
time savings and enhanced proje ct delivery 
(The Build Chain, 2023). Furthermore, the 
shift towards digital supply chain 
management is not solely foc used on 
efficiency; it represents a strategic move 
towards a more sustainable construction 
industry that aligns with contemporary 
environmental goals (Raiden & King, 2021). 
Several studies have explored the digital 
transformation of conventional construction 
supply chains (Wang et al., 2020; Hijazi et 
al., 2022). Cherian et al. (2021) developed a 
framework for digital transformation in 
construction supply chains. However, there 
remains a gap in comprehensive studies 
assessing the Information Technology (IT) 
tools necessary for the digital transformation 
of GSCM in construction.  This will provide 
construction firms with the knowledge 
needed to select, implement, and leverage IT 
tools effectively within GSCM frameworks. 
This supports transformational change 
towards more sustainable, efficient, and 
accountable construction supply chains, 
which are increasingly demanded by 
regulators, clients, and society. 
 Therefore, this study aims to evaluate 
GSCM processes within the construction 
industry alongside the tools required for their 
digital transformation 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Concept of GSCM in Construction 
Green Supply Chain Management (GSCM) 
involves managing all activities related to 
minimizing the environmental impact of a n 
organization’s supply chains  
(Balasubramanian & Shukla, 2017). The goal 
is to achieve zero net harm to the 
environment from all the supply chains that 
contribute to the production of its final 
products. This approach is aimed at reducing 
the environmental footprint of companies and 
promoting sustainability (Goncalves & Silva, 
2021; Paletta et al. ). GSCM is considered to 
be the most effective management tool that 
aims to in tegrate environmental 
sustainability thinking into the built 
environment (Oyefusi et al. 2022). 
Several studies, though not all, considered 
the objectives of GSCM. These were argued 
to be: increasing the competitive advantage 
of a firm (Woo et al., 2016), providing 
stakeholders with added value (Da Rocha et 
al. (2009), and improving the performance of 
a supply chain ecologically, economically, 
and operationally (Balasubramanian  & 
Shukla, 2017). 
GSCM Processes in Construction 
Green Supply Chain Management (GSCM) 
integrates environmental factors into 
traditional Supply Chain Management 
(SCM) practices, covering the entire lifecycle 
from design to end -of-life management 
(Setyaning et al., 2020). Its application in 
construction spans key supply chain phases: 
pre-contract, contract, and post -contract 
(Yevu et al., 2021). 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Bello et al.  
3 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
At the pre-contract stage, GSCM emphasizes 
optimizing processes such as bidding, 
evaluation, and supplier sourcing to ensure 
sustainability and compliance with 
environmental standards. The contract stage 
targets green logistics and sustainable 
production o f construction materials and 
components, minimizing environmental 
impacts during project execution. Post -
contract phases focus on ongoing green 
operations and maintenance (Naniekh et al., 
2019). 
Several frameworks have been developed to 
articulate GSCM in construction. For 
example, Naniekh et al. (2019) propose five 
core concepts: green initiation, green product 
design, green material management, green 
construction, and green operation and 
maintenance. Wibowo et al. (2018) expand 
this to include 22 dimensions and 82 
elements across these concepts, stressing 
comprehensive stakeholder involvement and 
performance measurement. Similarly, 
Wiguna et al. (2021) highlight the importance 
of managing hazardo us materials, waste 
reduction, and management support systems 
(EMS, ISO 14001) as essentials for GSCM 
implementation. 
Badi (2019) offers a systemic view, defining 
GSCM as a holistic approach to minimize 
environmental harm while improving 
competitiveness and stakeholder value, 
driven by environmental regulations and 
business efficiency demands. Oyefusi et al. 
(2024) further extend this by linking GSCM 
with regenerative supply chain management, 
emphasizing innovation toward restoration 
and long-term ecological resilience. 
Eco/Green Design 
This is of paramount importance for the 
sector, as decisions made  during this stage 
will significant ly influence the life -cycle 
environmental impact of  the building  
(Balasubramanian &  Shukla, 2017 ; 
Handayani et al., 2021 ). Green design in 
construction supply chain management refers 
to the integration of environmental 
considerations throughout the entire supply 
chain of a construction project, from design 
and material sourcing to construction and 
waste management (Albayrak & Ozdemir, 
2022; Ding et al., 2021). This approach aims 
to minimize the construction process 's 
environmental impact a nd c reate more 
sustainable and resource-efficient buildings. 
Green Procurement/Purchasing 
According to Titus and Brochner (2005), 
Construction procurement is a key activity 
within the supply chain associated with the 
provision of construction works and forms an 
integral part of supply chain management 
functions. Procurement as such is an integral 
part of construction projects and occ urs at 
any point in a project cycle where external 
resources are required to provide supplies 
and services in any combination green 
procurement, also known as environmentally 
preferable purchasing (EPP), plays a vita l 
role in green supply chain management 
(GSCM) within the construction industry  
(Pomponi & Moncaster,  2017). By 
integrating environmental considerations 
into the entire purchasing process, 
construction companies can significantly 
reduce their environmental impact and 
promote sustainable practices throughout 
their supply chains (Zhu et al., 2014). 
Green Transportation 
According to Oyefusi et al. (2022), Statistics 
show that transportation alone is responsible 
for a seventh of greenhouse gas emissions. 
As a result, the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) concludes that 
transport systems must seek to concurrently 
enhance mobility, and build resilience to 
climate change. Furthermore,  Woods & 
Hollnagel (2017)  opined that the built 
environment professionals must seek to 
design, construct, use, and operate  transport 
infrastructure in a way that optimises 