--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 17, No 1, (2024) 29 – 45                         
 
CONTRIBUTION OF CONDENSATION TO DAMPNESS ON EXTERNAL 
SURFACES OF WALLS: A CASE STUDY OF BORNO AND YOBE STATES IN 
NORTH EASTERN NIGERIA 
 
MACHINA Musa Adamu¹, UMAR Bello², LAWAL Yerima Sallau², IBRAHIM 
Muhammad Mustapha² 
 
¹ Department of Building, University of Maiduguri, Nigeria. 
² Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria-Nigeria. 
 
Correspondence: musamachina272@gmail.com 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Series of efforts were made from various quotas over the decades to curtail dampness on 
external surfaces of walls and yet the menace has continued unabated, particularly in 
Nigeria. This is because ‘underground moisture’ from rain and other sources of wat er is 
erroneously believed to be the only cause of the menace. This study provides a lasting 
solution to the problem by acknowledging ‘persistent condensation’ as another cause of 
dampness on external surfaces of walls. It investigates where the problem lies in the context 
of ‘persistent condensation’: Is it with the type of coating used on external surfaces of walls 
or with construction professionals? Structured questionnaires were used in sourcing field 
data and Chi-Square was the statistical tool utilised in analysis. Results in the study indicate 
that, the use of tex -cote coating and tiles can alleviate dampness on external surfaces of 
walls. Further analysis however, has exonerated construction professionals from possessing 
insufficient knowledge on the general causes of dampness in buildings, but it failed to spare 
them from possessing sufficient knowledge on the mechanism of ‘persistent condensation’. 
Recommendations include among others, the general use of tex -cote coating and tiles on 
surfaces prone to condensation and keeping construction professionals abreast on the 
sources and causes of condensation on external surfaces of walls by organizing periodic 
workshops and seminars. 
 
KEYWORDS: Atmospheric moisture, Clear -sky radiation, Condensation, Dampness, 
External surfaces of walls 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Condensation is the process by which a gas 
changes its state to liquid. In the realm of 
building and construction however, the 
term ‘condensation’ may refer to the 
conversion of water vapour in the air to 
liquid water on the surfaces of structural 
elements. This wetting mechanism occurs 
when a moist air comes in contact with 
surfaces that are at or below the dew point 
temperature of the air (Rafferty, 2022; 
Duncan, 2021). 
Condensation is a commonly seen 
phenomenon. It can be observed on 
surfaces of canned drinks taken out of the 
fridge and left in the open. It can be seen 
on bath room mirrors during showers, or 
on window glasses in the morning, 
especially during raining sea sons 
(Duncan, 2021 ; Susan, 2020) . Just as 
condensation takes place on indoor 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Contribution of condensation to dampness…  
30 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria.  
surfaces, it also occurs outside the 
building. The water seen dropping from 
the roof in the morning, especially during 
raining season even when it does not rain, 
is as a result of condensation that took 
place on the roof the previous night. The 
water droplets or frost normally observed 
on grasses in the morning, especially 
during raining season even when it does 
not rain, are all due to condensation that 
took place the previous night ( Ronald, 
2024; Broan, 2018). Outdoor condensation 
occurs on any surface wh ich is left 
exposed to the atmosphere in the night. 
This implies that even structural elements, 
such as floors and walls that are left 
exposed to the atmosphere are not spared 
from condensation in the night ( William, 
2021; Banjo, 2021) . Condensation that 
takes place on surfaces is referred to as 
‘Surface Condensation’. Surface 
condensation appears as a film of moisture 
or as beads of water on the surface and it 
is always very obvious on harder and 
impervious surfaces. An absorbent surface 
may not show conde nsation at first, but it 
will show as the condensation persists 
(McMullan, 2022).  
Condensation that persists for a long time, 
particularly on absorbent surfaces, will 
eventually cause dampness ( Xue et al , 
2022) and, if left untreated on building 
facades, may lead to serious visual 
nuisance as it is the case all over urban 
centers in Nigeria (Ayokunle et al, 2023; 
Zakkariyya et al , 2020) . In fact, the 
problem of dampness on external surfaces 
of building facades has remained unabated 
for decades in Nigeria because 
‘underground moisture’ from rain and 
other sources of water is erroneously 
believed as the only cause of the problem 
(Ayokunle et al, 2023; Nwankwo, 1999); 
Zakkariyya et al,  2020; Joseph, 2021; 
Okoli & Kehinde , 2002; Sani et al,2022; 
Ayokunle et al,  2023). This study 
therefore provides a lasting solution to the 
problem by treasuring ‘persistent 
condensation’ as another cause of 
dampness on external surfaces of walls. 
Therefore, the aim of the study is to find 
lasting solution to the problem of 
dampness on external surfaces of 
buildings in Borno and Yobe states, 
Nigeria and this is expected to be 
accomplished through review of all 
previously identified causes of the menace 
and acknowledging ‘persistent 
condensation’ as another cause of 
dampness on external surfaces of 
buildings. To this end, the study is to 
conduct series of empi rical investigation 
in the context of ‘Persistent Condensation 
on External Surfaces’ of buildings, analyse 
all results obtained from the investigation, 
establish the actual causes of the menace, 
and recommend lasting solutions to the 
problem of dampness on external surfaces 
of buildings in the two states.          
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Steam, Water Vapour, Condensation 
and Evaporation 
Steam and mist are not water vapour, 
rather, they are suspended droplets of 
water liquid. Water vapour or moisture, 
which is invisible, is also naturally formed 
above liquid water. This process is called 
evaporation and it occurs because some 
liquid molecules gain enough energy from 
chance collision with other molecules, to 
escape from the liquid surface and become 
vapour molecules (McMullan, 2022;  
Rafferty, 2022; Vitro Architectural Glass, 
2024). Therefore, if the air space above a 
liquid is enclosed then evaporated vapour 
molecules will collect in the space and as 
they collect, some molecules continually 
return (condense) to the liquid state and 
eventually the number of molecules 
evaporating become equal to the number 
of molecules condensing. At this moment, 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Machina et al.  
31 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
the air in the space is said to be saturated 
(figure 1). This means, the space contains 
the maximum amount of water vapour 
possible at that temperature. The water 
vapour has reached its ‘Dew Point’ and 
therefore, any additional vapour into the 
space at tha t temperature will be 
condensed into liquid state (Bertley, 2020; 
McMullan, 2022; Rafferty, 2022) . The 
pressure exerted on the walls of the space 
at that moment is called Saturated Vapour 
Pressure (SVP).  
The situation, however, will be different 
with increased in temperature on the 
liquid. At that higher temperature, even 
though more liquid molecules will 
evaporate from the liquid into the space 
thereby increasing the moisture content of 
the space, the space now acquires a higher 
saturation point giving rise to higher dew 
point and hence higher SVP. In other 
words, increased temperature on liquid 
releases more moisture and increases both 
the dew point and SVP of the air above it 
(Bertley, 2020; McMullan, 2022; Rafferty, 
2022). 
Conversely, if an unsaturated sample of 
moist air is cooled then the sample will, at 
a certain temperature, become saturated. If 
the sample is further cooled below this 
dew point temperature, then some of the 
water vapour must condense to liquid 
state. This equally implies that, if moist air 
is in contact with a surface and the 
temperature of the surface happens to drop 
below the dew point temperature of the air, 
condensation will inevitably occur on the 
surface (Bertley, 2020;  McMullan, 2022; 
Rafferty, 202 2). Therefore, the general 
requirements for any condensation to 
occur are moist air (also called moisture or 
humidity) and change in temperature (cold 
air or cold surface).  
 
 
 
Problems associated with Condensation 
Condensation can lead to quite a number 
of problems. These problems could be 
mild in nature or much more severe 
depending on the persistent and duration 
of the condensation. However, some of the 
potential dangers posed by persistent 
condensation according to Bertley,2020; 
Duncan, 2021, are:  
(i) Mould growth,  
(ii) Stain on walls, windows and doors,  
(iii) Damages to electrical appliances, 
 (iv) Corrosion of metals, and  
(v) Wood rot  
 
Sources of Condensation 
While sources of condensation on and 
within objects in a constructed structure 
are mainly showering and bathing, 
laundry, cooking, breathing, air 
conditioning (Joseph, 2021; Xue et al,  
2022), and pattern of use of the building, 
the major sources of condensation on 
surfaces of the structure are as follows: 
(i) The Atmosphere. 
The atmosphere contains about 5 per cent 
water vapour by weight and yet the 
condensation effect produced by this 
relatively small percentage of vapour on 
constructed structures is considerably 
alarming. It is however understood that, 
most of the moisture i n the atmosphere is 
as a result of evaporation of water 
molecules from the sea, which is believed 
to cover about two -third of the mother 
earth’s surface  (Teichol, 2018; Rafferty, 
2022; McMullan, 2022).  
(ii) Thermal Bridge 
When a material of high conductivity is 
made to pass completely through a 
structural element, such as wall, floor, 
roof, etc, then the thermal insulation of that 
element is said to be ‘Bridged’, that is, the 
insulation of the elements is lowered at 
that po ints of bridging ( Maxwell, 2020; 
McMullan, 2022).  