--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 17, No 1, (2024) 63 – 77            
EXPLORING THE FACTORS AFFECTING HOUSING MAINTENANCE 
MANAGEMENT IN THE LUGBE FEDERAL HOUSING ESTATE, ABUJA 
 
IBRAHIM Emmanuel Chongcicimmi1, LAWAL Fadila Muhammad2, BELONWU 
Christopher Chidi3, ISAAC Pate Paul2, JOSEPH Ishaku Bitrus2 
 
1Department of Building Covenant University, Ota Ogun State, Nigeria  
2Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria 
3Department of Building, Niger Delta, University, Wilberforce Island, Bayelsa, Nigeria 
 
Correspondence: emmanuel.ibrahim@covenantuniversity.edu.ng 
ABSTRACT  
Housing estate maintenance is crucial for sustaining safe, functional, and comfortable urban 
environments. However, the effectiveness of housing maintenance is often hindered by factors 
that undermine sustainability goals. This study explores the factors a ffecting housing estate 
maintenance in the Lugbe Federal Housing Estate, Abuja. The study adopted a quantitative 
research design approach using a structured questionnaire. A total of 133 valid 
questionnaires were retrieved and analyzed using frequency dist ribution and mean score 
ranking. The results of the study identified inadequacy of maintenance work (Mean = 3.79), 
persistent breakdown of facilities  (Mean = 3.77 ), building design  (Mean = 3.77) and 
irregular inspection of building facilities (Mean = 3.74) as the most critical factors affecting 
housing estate maintenance management. The study concluded that housing maintenance 
management in Lugbe Housing Estate is significantly constrained by inadequate 
maintenance work, frequent breakdown of facilities, and irregular inspections.  Therefore, 
the study recommends that estate managers enforce a quality management policy to ensure 
the sustainable maintenance management of housing estate facilities. 
KEYWORDS: Estate Management, Housing Maintenance, Lugbe Federal Housing Estate, 
Public Housing, Sustainable Housing 
INTRODUCTION  
Housing estate maintenance represents a 
major aspect of sustainable urban 
development, aimed at preserving safe, 
efficient, and comfortable residential spaces. 
According to Grum and Kobal (2020), the 
effectiveness of maintenance efforts directly 
influences not only the physical state of 
buildings and infrastructure but also the 
social cohesion, economic stability, and 
mental well -being of occupants. Similarly, 
Dzulkifli, Sarbini, Ibrahim, Abidin, Yahaya, 
and Azizan (2021) noted that although 
maintenance has often been approached 
through technical and a dministrative lenses, 
emerging challenges highlight the necessity 
of incorporating wider contextual and 
human-centered factors to improve 
outcomes. Furthermore, according to Altaie 
(2023), building housing maintenance 
management refers to the ongoing upkee p 
and management of residential properties, 
including repairs, upgrades, and preventative 
maintenance. Therefore, it is a critical aspect 
of ensuring the safety and livability of 
housing for residents. 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Exploring the factors affecting housing…… 
64 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
According to Corallo, Lazoi, Malagnino, 
Mangia, Mangialardi and Sarcinella (2022), 
one of the main challenges in housing 
maintenance management is the increasing 
cost of repairs and maintenance. Likewise, 
Saperi, Wan Ismail, and Mohd (2024) 
asserted that the lack of fu nding for 
maintenance and repairs stands as a major 
challenge for housing estate maintenance.  
Pelzeter (2022)  asserted that  many housing 
authorities and property owners struggle to 
secure adequate funding for maintenance, 
leading to deferred m aintenance and poor 
living conditions for residents. 
Correspondingly, the National Low Income 
Housing Coalition (NLIHC, 2020) highlights 
a critical housing gap in the United States, 
revealing a shortage of approximately 7 
million affordable and available r ental units 
for extremely low -income households; thus, 
this shortage of affordable housing makes it 
difficult for housing authorities to allocate 
sufficient funds for maintenance and repairs. 
Consequently, Modu, Sapri, and Muin (2024) 
asserted that housing maintenance is a 
recurring concern in Nigeria due to the rapid 
growth of dilapidating housing facilities in 
the country. This poor maintenance attitude 
has accumulated consequences  leading to 
harmful effects on the users of the housing 
facilities. As noted by Moore (2019), most 
housing in Nigeria, both public and private, 
undergo these maintenance challenges.  
Considering the role of housing facilities, the 
need for effective housing estate maintenance 
management is critical for sustainable socio-
cultural and economic development (Kumar, 
2024).   
Although sustainable housing provision is 
crucial for urban development, there has been 
little to no research on the condition of 
Federal Housing Estates and the factors 
influencing their maintenance management 
in Lugbe, an area experiencing rapid housing 
development in Nigeria. Therefore, this study 
seeks to evaluate the condition of building 
and infrastructural facilities within the 
housing estate, examine the housing 
maintenance management schedule, and 
explore the factors influencing maintenance 
management in the Lugbe Federal Housing 
Estate, in order to provide insight into the 
infrastructure development of the estate and 
propose strategies for improving the 
condition of housing facilities. 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The Concept of Housing Estate 
Maintenance Management  
Housing estates serve as a vital element in 
urban development, delivering organized, 
affordable and long-term housing solutions to 
diverse populations (Okoye, Umeora, Ifebi & 
Onwuzuligbo, 2018). According to Okoye 
(2024) effective management of these estates 
is essential for sustaining the built 
environment as it helps in ensuring that the 
building occupants  safe and comfortable 
within the estate environ . As highlighted by 
Pelzeter (2022), estate maintenance 
management from the physical perspective , 
fosters structural integrity  sustainability, 
serviceability of amenities and 
environmental quality , influences resident 
satisfaction and promotes long-term viability 
of the housing scheme.  
According to Modu et al., (2024) the Federal 
Housing Authority has intensified efforts 
toward providing housing  facilities in 
Nigeria. Though the housing supply still does 
not meet the housing demand of the people, a 
significant impact is noticeable.  Puķīte and 
Geipele (2017)  asserted that appropriate 
maintenance management principles are 
necessary to make these housing estates 
functional and comfortable for human 
activities. Yahaya (2019) argued that Federal 
Housing Authority (FHA) has concentrated 
its energies mainly on the provision of a large 
number of housing units without giving 
adequate attention to their management 
implications. This is evidenced by the poor 
physical outlook of Federal Housing Estates 
across the country. In this regard, Marutlulle 
(2021) argued that these houses are,  in most 
cases, characterized by declining housing and 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Ibrahim et al. 
65 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
 
infrastructural qualities, thereby threatening 
human health and safety while also 
hampering the functionality of housing units. 
 
Factors Affecting Housing Estate 
Maintenance in Nigeria  
Housing maintenance management is often 
affected by several factors which comprise its 
sustainability goals over the period of usage. 
The factors affecting housing maintenance in 
Nigeria center on understanding the reasons 
behind the poor state of housing maintenance 
in the country and identifying the factors that 
contribute to this issue (Okon & Amobi, 
2024). According to  Sule, Esidene, and 
Adadu (2024) the Nigerian government has 
not prioritized the provision of maintenance 
services for public housing, le ading to the 
deterioration of these properties. Therefore, 
this reveals a lack of clear regulations and 
standards for the maintenance of housing  
facilities, making it difficult for homeowners 
to know their responsibilities and rights (Sule 
et al. , 2024).  Furthermore, several studies 
have identified critical factors affecting 
housing maintenance in Nigeria. As 
highlighted by Ayobami and Ekwueme 
(2024), one of the major factors that affects 
housing maintenance is the lack of 
government support and inadequate  policies 
for housing maintenance.  According to 
Akinwande, Hui  and Dekker (2024) and 
Akinola et al.  (2024), h igh maintenance 
costs, driven by expensive materials and 
labor, hinder timely repairs, especially 
among low -income homeowners  are 
considered as factors affecting housing 
maintenance management . Similarly, p oor 
construction practices and the use of 
substandard materials, particularly in low -
income housing, contribute to frequent 
repairs were identified by Ajayi et al. (2023). 
Akinola et al., (2024) asserted that a general 
lack of awareness and education on proper 
maintenance practices also results in neglect  
and costly future repairs. In addition, a study 
by Adeleke et al. (2023) have revealed that 
inappropriate building design, poor 
workmanship, ageing facilities, and 
inadequate construction supervision 
significantly affect the physical condition of 
high-rise residential buildings.  Owolabi, 
Apanisile and Omiata (2019) affirmed that 
design failures, wrong material 
specifications, insufficient construction 
detailing, and cash flow constraints are major 
contributors to inadequate housing 
maintenance management.  
Notably, empirical studies  (Owolabi et al. , 
2019; Adeleke et al. , 2023; Ayobami & 
Ekwueme, 2024; Akinwande et al. , 2024; 
Akinola et al.,  2024) have revealed that  
housing maintenance management in Nigeria 
is influenced by a  synergy of technical, 
managerial and financial factors.  These 
factors as synthesized from previous studies 
include inadequate maintenance work, 
frequent breakdown of building facilities, 
poor building design, irregular building 
inspections, low -quality building materials, 
building occupants’ attitude to use of housing 
facilities, Lack of training of maintenance 
staff, building complexity, delays in 
attending to maintenance works and failure in 
reporting of maintenance related problems by 
occupants. Hence these factors were assessed 
in this study.   
 
METHODOLOGY  
Research Design 
The study adopted both descriptive and 
exploratory research approaches to explore 
the housing estate maintenance management 
and factors affecting housing estate 
maintenance management in Lugbe Federal 
Housing Estate, Abuja. A descriptive strategy 
was adopt ed to understand the current 
conditions of the housing units and facilities, 
while the exploratory aspect focused on 
identifying the underlying factors affecting 
maintenance practices through residents' 
perceptions. The case study is Lugbe Federal 
Housing Estate Federal Capital Abuja.  
 