--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 17, No 1, (2024) 78 – 92                                                 
COMPARATIVE IMPACT OF PROCUREMENT-RELATED CONTRIBUTORS 
ON COST AND TIME PERFORMANCE OF SUBEB BUILDING PROJECTS IN 
KADUNA STATE 
 
JIYA Victoria Hassana1, KADO Dikko2, DODO Mansir2. 
 1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Air Force Institute of Technology, 
Kaduna, Nigeria. 
2Department of Building, Faculty of Environmental Design, 
Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria 
 
Correspondence: hassvics@gmail.com  
 
 
ABSTRACT 
In construction, n umerous factors known as contributors such as procurement processes/ 
procedures, directions etc that brings about the achievement of client’s project objectives 
have potentials to impact project performance outcomes.  Hence, the need through field 
survey investigates the comparative impact of 20 Procurement Related Contributors (PRC) 
with 4 sub - groups ( project payment , procurement, selection  and conditions of contract 
related factors) impact on the cost and time performance of building projects.  Data was 
collected through 105 questionnaires distributed to construction professionals  in State 
Universal Basic Education Board (SUBEB) building projects in Kaduna State and analyzed 
using SPSS 22, applying Mean Score (MS), ranking etc. The research discovered that, the 
respondent’s highest response scale for cost is moderate impact = 2.50 -3.49 and time is 
high impact =3.50 -4.49 with (50% and 80% overall response for most factors). 
Additionally, the highest impact factors from the 4 sub -groups are: Payment arrangement 
motivations to contractor on both cost and time performance (MS = 3.90 and 4.80 
respectively). Procurement method type and project responsibilities/contractual obligations 
to people/organization on cost (MS = 4.08 each) and variation orders in project on time 
(MS = 4.47). Participation of many decision makers on both cost and time performance (MS 
= 4.06 and 4.50 respectively). Contract documents coherent with t he existing legal 
framework and contract conditions type on cost and time (MS = 3.65 and 4.20 respectively). 
It recommended that the highest impact factors should be given more priority compare to 
others by the construction professionals, in any building construction projects for better 
cost and time performance.   
  
KEY WORDS: Building Projects, Cost Performance, Procurement Contributors, SUBEB 
and Time Performance.  
INTRODUCTION 
In the construction industry, the issue of 
project performance cannot be over 
emphasized, this is because  construction 
project success is often evaluated for 
performance dimensions cost and time 
inclusive. Cost and time are  one of the 
most significant dimensions of 
construction project performance and the 
driving force of project success ( Babalola 
et al., 2015;  Saraf, 2015 Mohammed, 
2016). Soewin and Chinda, (2018); 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Jiya, et al. 
79 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
Mahmoud, (2020); Bekr, (2017).  all 
affirmed that the completion of any project 
within the estimated cost and time are the 
basic criteria for the success of any 
construction project regardless of size and 
complexity of project . In recent time due 
to the abnormal increase in the cost and 
over time of projects, cost and time of 
construction projects has received the 
attention of most stakeholders. This is 
because cost and time are among the major 
considerations from inception throughout 
the construction project life cycle. It is 
however obvious  from previous studies  
(Dissanayaka and Kumaraswamy , 2002; 
Nyangwara, and Datche, 2015; Mahmoud, 
2020; Jiya et al., 2024) that achieving cost 
and time performance of any construction 
project, cost  and time  dimension 
performance is related to numerous project 
related contributors such as client, 
contractor, environmental, procurement, 
payment related contributors etc impacting 
on the performance.  
The study focused on project related 
contributors that impact project 
performance in terms of Procurement 
Related Contributors (PRC) (Dissanayaka 
and Kumaraswamy , 2002; Ogunsami, 
2023; Jiya et al. , 2021). CIOB (2010) 
supported that, procurement attributes are 
procurement related contributors 
absolutely crucial to the performance 
dimensions. These are the basis for the 
various processes that bring about the 
construction of project that meet the client 
needs known as procurement  related 
factors which contains function attributes 
as incorporating principal procurement 
sub-systems and possible choices that are 
there in. The procurement related 
contributors include: payment modali ties, 
selection methodologies factors , contract 
conditions among others Jiya et al. (2024). 
Procurement rela ted contributors are 
essential in procurement process and 
project execution at the end impacting 
building project performance.  
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Project performance in the construction 
industry is the degree of achievement of 
certain effort or undertaking.  It invariably 
involves placing consideration on the 
major project’s contributory factors in 
meeting or exceeding stakeholders’ needs 
and expectations within a given period of 
time, cost , quality, agreed terms among 
others (Rahman & Alzubi, 2015; 
Oladinrin, et al., 2013 ; Manknojiya & 
Ankitkumar, 2020; Ijigah et al., 2023).   
 Factors Impacting Project cost and 
time performance; the Global 
Perspectives 
From literature, it was observed that there 
is no consensus on the identification of 
enormous factors known as contributors 
which impact construction cost and time 
performance of building projects, 
basically because researches have widely 
viewed the subject from diverse 
perspective to define or determine the 
performance of construction projects. 
Amongst several research works which 
have been conducted to identify pro ject 
related contributors from diverse 
perspective on building project 
performance dimensions include: 
The study conducted by Omran et al 
(2012) to investigate project performance 
in Sudan construction industry: A case 
study.  The result found out that project 
availability of  time, the size and 
complexity of projects, the type of project 
and duration of pr oject, communication 
among project participants and overall 
managerial action, adequacy of design and 
specification, consultants commitment to 
ensure construction work according to 
specification, consultant cooperation to 
solve problems, consultants involv ement 
to monitor the project progress, client 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Comparative impact of procurement-related …. 
80 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
ability to brief the project objectives, the 
size of client’s organization and client’s 
ability to make decision, client’s 
interference during construction, the 
economic environment, political, social, 
skillful workers, quality control of 
materials, enough  supply of materials, 
procurement method, tendering method, 
project team leader experience, planning 
effort, budget progress monitoring. The 
result of a similar study by Saraf (2015) of 
India construction projects which was 
aimed to investigate factors affecting 
performance of construction project. The 
survey findings indicate that the most 
important factors affecting project 
performance are: improper planning, 
improper designing, site management, 
decision making, methods, shortage of 
labor and technical personnel, quality and 
shortage of materials, construction 
mistakes and defective work and 
productivity.  
Eriksson and Vennstrom (2012) carried 
out a similar study to investigate the  
Effects of procurement on project  
performance. The result found that 
Cooperative procurement procedures of 
joint specification, limited bid invitation, 
soft evaluation parameters, joint sub -
contractor selection, incentives, 
collaborative tools, contractor self-control 
and collaboration on project all have 
various effects on project performance. 
these factors according to Erickson and 
Westerberg (2012) shows how various 
procurement precedence the different 
procurement related factors at the design, 
bid invitation, bid evaluation and sub – 
contracting selection stages, compensation 
factors that can have various influences on 
project performance affect different 
aspects of project performance.  
Nyangwara and Datche (2015) in Kenya  
supported that the most important factors 
agreed by the owners, consultants and 
contractors were: average delay because of 
closures and materials shortage; 
availability of resources as planned 
through project duration; leadership skills 
for project manager; escalation of material 
prices; availability of personals with high 
experience and qualification; and quality 
of equipment and raw materials in project.  
It was concluded that projects were 
delayed and the actual cost of projects was 
more than the estimated cost because of 
coastal region of Kenya political 
conditions and delayed payments which 
results to unavailability of materials.  
Study by Mathonsi and Thawal (2012) 
also carried out a similar study in South 
Africa. On the selection of procurement 
systems in the South African construction 
industry. The result revealed factors such 
as internal factors (project and client 
characteristics) and external factors 
(market competition, information 
technology, regulatory environment, 
natural causes and globalization) influence 
of the project life cycle, exped ited project 
delivery; time, quality and price certainty.   
Dissanayaka and Kumaraswam y (20 02) 
concluded that significant factors that 
mainly governed cost and time are 
contractual payment modalities and 
project characteristics and client/client 
representative characteristic. 
The Nigerian Perspectives on Factors 
Impacting Project cost and time 
performance 
In Nigeria, Oladinrin et al. (2013) 
conducted a study on the e ffect of the 
variants of procurement systems common 
to the Nigerian construction industry on 
building project performance (cost and 
quality). The study revealed that the 
traditional system of procurement is the 
most adopted option while the design and 
build system performs better in cost, but 
lag construction management system in 