--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 17, No 1, (2024) 114 – 121 
ASSESSMENT OF THE POTENTIAL BENEFITS AND BARRIERS TO ADOPTING 
LEAN CONSTRUCTION PRINCIPLES BY CLIENT ORGANISATIONS IN 
NIGERIA 
IBRAHIM Muhammad Laminu1 *, AHMADU Hassan Adaviriku2 , MUHAMMAD 
Ahmad Sani3 , SHEHU Ismail Umar4, NENSOK Mohammed Hassan5 
1* Department of Quantity Surveying, Federal University Birnin Kebbi (FUBK), Nigeria. 
2&3 Department of Quantity Surveying, Ahmadu Bello University (ABU), Zaria, Nigeria. 
4&5 Department of Building, Federal University Birnin Kebbi (FUBK), Nigeria. 
Correspondence: im.laminu@fubk.edu.ng  
ABSTRACT: 
The principles of lean construction are designed and intended to minimise waste throughout 
the construction process, thereby delivering greater value for money to the Client. However, 
the potential benefits and barriers to adopting lean construction princi ples by the Client’s 
organisations in Nigeria have not been established, which is critical towards successful 
implementation. Thus, this study identified and assessed the potential benefits and barriers of 
adopting lean construction principles by client organisations in Nigeria. Quantitative research 
approach was adopted and questionnaires were distributed to the respondents. The target 
respondents are TETFUND beneficiary institutions. 67 copies of the questionnaire were 
distributed and 67% (45 copies of th e questionnaire) were retrieved. The data collected was 
analysed using descriptive statistics that includes: frequency tables showing percentages, 
mean and Standard Deviation (SD). Maximise productivity and reduced waste are the most 
significant potential benefits of adopting lean construction principles by the client sector in 
Nigeria. While Poor planning, Inadequate resources, Corruption practices, Lack of awareness 
programmes and Lack of design constructability are identified as the major barriers of 
adopting lean construction principles. The Study reveals that the client sector of the Nigerian 
Construction Industry (NCI) acknowledges the potential benefit of adopting Lean Construction 
principles even though the barriers identified will hinder the success ful implementation. 
However, there is need for more capacity building programmes and awareness campaign on 
the concept of lean construction principles in Nigeria. All stakeholders concerned should 
consider integrating lean construction into the tertiary ed ucation curriculum because of its 
importance and benefits to the construction industry at large.   
KEYWORDS: Client Organisations, Lean Construction Principles, Lean Concept, Tertiary 
Institutions, TETFund. 
  
--- PAGE 2 ---
Ibrahim et al. 
115 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
INTRODUCTION  
Lean Construction (LC) is defined as a way 
of managing work, reducing waste and 
adding value in construction (Howell & 
Reed, 2007). The idea of applying the lean 
production principle to construction was 
analyzed by some of the researchers in the 
Construction industry since 1990s (Salem, 
Solomon, Genaidy & Luegring, 2005). LC 
differs from present traditional construction 
management practice, it is generally based 
on production management principles, and 
it gives better result in all kinds of projects 
(Salem et al. , 2005). According to 
Aigbavboa et al. (2016) and Kasimu et al. 
(2019), the Lean Construction Principles 
(LCP) have been established as means of 
minimizing the waste in the process, 
duration, cost and labour of construction 
projects. Mohammed et al.  (2019) 
described LCP as means of delivering value 
to the customers and eliminating things that 
do not add value to clients. Hence, LC is 
seen as an alternative approach that could 
significantly improve effective project 
delivery in the Construction Industry, 
thereby reducing waste and increasing 
productivity and added value. 
In attempt to ascertain successful 
implementation and effectiveness of the 
LCP, researchers conducted studies on LCP 
in some countries like Brazil (Silva and 
Cardoso, 1999), Chile (Alarcon & Ashley, 
1999), the UK (Common  et al.,  2000), 
Singapore (Dulaimi & Tanamas, 2001) , 
Abu Dhabi (Raid, 2012) , Malaysia 
(Muhammad et al., 2013), Turkey (Algan & 
Yasemin, 2013), and Nigeria (Ahiakwo et 
al., 2013) and India (Gowtham & 
Sivakumar, 2017) . However, effective 
implementation of Lean Construction 
Principles (LCP) critically depends on the 
readiness of the Construction Industry to 
adopt the Concept as well as identifying the 
potential benefits and barriers of adopting 
the LCP. With this, it is important for the 
Nigerian construction industry to  equally 
explore widely , the benefits of l ean 
construction, in order to attain the best 
practice and also to improve service 
delivery process in the Construction 
Industry (Olamilokun, 2017).  
Olamilokun (2017) investigated the 
readiness of Nigerian construction related 
professionals (Consultants) to adopt lean 
construction principles , while further 
studies by Owoseni (2017) and Mohammed 
et al. (2019) assessed the readiness of the 
Nigerian building contracting 
(construction) firms. Ibrahim et al. (2024) 
also conducted a study to assess the Client’s 
organisations in adopting LCP.  
Adoption of LCP can only be achieved 
when all the sectors of the Nigerian 
Construction Industry (NCI) have a fair 
level of awareness and stake to adopt it . 
Yet, the perception of the Client’s sector of 
the NCI on the benefits and barriers to adopt 
lean Construction principle is not known  
which is very critical towards successful 
adoption LCP. Hence, this constitute a gap 
in knowledge which this study sets out to 
fill. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Lean Construction: Concept and 
Principles 
The Concept of Lean construction  was 
derived from the Toyota Production 
System, which focuses on creating value for 
clients while minimizing waste throughout 
the construction process . Key principles 
include value identification, waste 
elimination, continuous flow, pull -based 
production, and continuous improvement 
(Howell, 1999). Unlike traditional 
construction methods, lean construction 
fosters collaboration and flexibility, 
enabling teams to adapt to project changes 
efficiently. LCP are one of such innovative 
processes that bring about the much needed 
continuous improvement and desired 
change in the construction industry  
(Olamilokun, 2015). 
In developed economies, lean construction 
has gained traction due to its proven 
benefits. Countries like the United States 
and Japan have successfully integrated lean 
principles into their construction projects, 
resulting in improved efficiency and cost 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Assessment of the potential benefits …. 
116 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
savings (Ballard & Howell, 2013). In 
contrast, developing nations face unique 
challenges, including limited access to 
advanced technologies and inadequate 
training programs. 
The adoption of LC in Nigeria is still in its 
infancy. This makes it very critical to 
investigate the factors that will facilitate 
and those that will hinder the successful 
adoption of LCP by the stakeholders’ 
organizations and the entire construction 
industry   
Potential Benefits to Adopting LCP 
LC has led to considerable improvement in 
the performance of CI professionals, 
particularly in design, construction and 
facility management  (Olamilokun et al.,  
2017). T he application of lean 
methodologies has shown potential to 
enhance project delivery by streamlining 
workflows and fostering collaboration 
among stakeholders involved in 
construction projects (Hamzeh et al., 2019). 
The benefits arise from the core lean 
principles seeking to minimize waste and 
optimize efficiency throughout the 
construction processes.  LCP is seen as 
drivers/facilitators that can help the 
building industry to improve its 
productivity by ensuring effective 
communication and collaboration among 
all project stakeholders from inception to 
completion of building projects  (Salem et 
al., 2005). Several LC related studies have 
been reported, especially those that have to 
do with its success stories and inherent 
benefits (Olamilokun et al. , 2017). 
However, this study adopted eight (8) 
potential benefits for adopting LCP in 
Nigeria, identified by Olamilokun et al.  
(2017) and Owoseni (2017), which are: 
i. Improved design; 
ii. Improved health and safety; 
iii. Improved quality, fewer 
defect; 
iv. Greater customer 
satisfaction; 
v. Maximise productivity; 
vi. Reduced cost and inventory; 
vii. Reduced waste; 
viii. Reduced project schedule; 
 
Barriers to Adopting LCP  
Studies have identified several barriers, 
including, poor planning, corruption, a lack 
of technical expertise, insufficient 
awareness, and cultural resistance to 
change ( Olamilokun 2015 & Owoseni, 
2017; Aisha et al.,  2019; Nwaki et al.,  
2021; Ogunbiyi et al.,  2021 However, 
Olamilokun et al.  (2017) and Owoseni 
(2017) revealed that the barriers hindering 
the adoption of LCP can be classified into 
six broad categories, they are: Management 
issues, Financial issues, Educational issues, 
Government issues, Human attitudinal 
issues and Technical issues. This study 
adopts these broad classifications of 
barriers to conduct assessment of barrier 
factors to adopt LCP by the clients’ 
organisation in Nigeria.   
METHODOLOGY 
Quantitative research approach was 
adopted due to the nature of the research 
problem and the data needed which requires 
data from many respondents in an 
economical and fast way . TETFUND 
beneficiary Tertiary institutions are the 
target population of this study. A list of the 
tertiary institutions that are TETFUND 
beneficiaries was obtained from the 
TETFUND website www.tetfund.gov.ng in 
March 2024 which shows that there are 200 
institutions that are TETFUND beneficiary 
in Nigeria. For this research, a total number 
67 was arrived as the sample size usi ng 
Kish (1965) sampling formula. Purposive 
sampling technique which is a non -
probability sampling technique was used in 
selecting the client organizations that are 
beneficiaries of TETFUND, taking note of 
ease of access to getting data, limited 
resources (time and budget) and logistical 
constraints, in addition to that not all the 
institutions have enough 
experience/projects to provide reliable 
answers to the question  especially new 
established tertiary institutions.  