--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 15, No 1, (2022) 50 – 57                   
 
 
AN ASSESSMENT OF THE EFFECT OF FASKARI DAM WATER ON 
COMPRESSIVE STRENGTH OF CONCRETE 
MAMMAN Mas’udu1, ABDULLAHI Sulaiman Faskari2, KHALIL Ismail 
Muhammad1 
1Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria  
2Government Science Secondary School Faskari  
Correspondence: masudmamman@yahoo.co.uk 
ABSTRACT  
In dry season , Faskari town experiences scarcity of water. This resulted to difficulty in 
sourcing water for domestic use as well as for construction works. This necessitates the 
community in Faskari town to depend on Faskari Earth Dam Water in dry season for 
construction works though, its physical appearance looks rowdy. This paper evaluates the 
suitability of Faskari Earth Dam Water for concrete work. Physical properties such as 
colour, odour , etc, as well as Chemical  characteristics of the water were exa mined. A 
concrete was produced using the tap water and Faskari Dam water where the workability 
and compressive strength of the concrete   were evaluated. . The study revealed that Faskari 
Earth Dam Water has a pH value of 7.3, Chloride concentration of 0.22 mg/l, Sulphate 
concentration of 0.00 mg/l which are within the permissible limit stipulated for water to be 
used for concrete production. It was also found out that the water is dark brown in colour 
and has a smelling odour. The slump test results of the  concrete mix produce with Faskari 
Earth dam water was found to be 11mm this indicates low workable concrete mix. Also, the 
28 days compressive strength of  concrete produced with Faskari Earth Dam Water is 
approximately 96.67% of the  control sample. Hence, based on the test carried out it was 
concluded that Faskari Earth Dam Water is suitable for concrete work. Therefore, water 
source from Faskari Earth Dam Water can be used for concrete production.  
KEYWORDS: Compressive strength, Concrete, Faskari Earth Dam, Water, workability.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
Concrete is one of the most widely used 
construction materials for both building and 
civil engineering construction  works 
(Kosmatka, 1988; Spelman & Lee, 2022). 
Concrete is made up of cement, aggregates 
and water. All the constituents play vital role 
in determining concrete properties (Shetty 
2005). Water initiates hydration process, 
determines the workability of concrete mi x 
and is use for curing. It has been established 
that water that is fit for drinking and free from 
impurities should be used for concrete works 
(Shetty 2005; Neville 2006).  
Production of concrete involves; batching, 
mixing with water, transporting and 
compacting (Obande, 1990). Concrete has 
two important states (fresh and harden), 
water plays important role in the two stages. 
Fresh or plastic concrete is a freshly mixed 
material which can be moulded into any 
shape. At fresh state, consistency, cohesion 
and workability are the most important 
properties of concrete.  
Workability facilitates compaction and 
transportation without segregation (Oktar, 
1996). Workability of concrete is the 
property that determines the effort required to 
manipulate a freshly mixed quantity of 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Mas’ud et al.                   
51 
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
concrete with minimum loss of homogeneity 
ASTM C125 (2000). Slump test is one of the 
commonest methods of determining concrete 
workability. The quality of hardened 
concrete can be said to be dependent on the 
properties at its fresh stage. It is therefore, 
important that properties of fresh concrete 
should be checked and ensured compliance 
with specified requirement. Quantity and 
quality of mixing water have a major role in 
determining these properties.  
At hardened state, it is imperative that the 
compressive strength of concrete satisfied its 
designed strength. Hence, compressive 
strength is usually considered in judging the 
quality of concrete as it is directly related to 
its density, permeability, tensile strength and 
chemical resistance.  It is important to note 
that adequate curing is one of the key factors 
for achieving optimum compressive strength. 
Also, water pay a major role in hydration 
process, mixing, finishing and curing of 
concrete. 
There are three (3) major sources of water in 
Faskari town namely; wells, boreholes, and 
Faskari earth dam. Faskari earth dam was 
constructed in the year 1973 for agricultural 
activities. The Dam is located in the eastern 
part of Faskari town of Katsina state. It has 
length of about 400metres with a breadth of 
250metres and the depth is about 7 metre s. 
The people in Faskari town depends on the 
wells and boreholes water for their domestic 
and other uses, while the Faskari earth dam is 
used for irrigation and  livestock drinking. 
However, during dry season (February to 
April), water table drops in the wells and 
boreholes. Therefore, the water from the 
Faskari Earth dam is commonly used for 
construction works. As a result of the large 
number of animals that use the dam as 
compared with its size, the colour and odour 
of the water change s. This among other 
reasons makes the quality of the water for 
construction work  question able. Caribbean 
(2013) recommended that water suspected to 
contain some impurities should b e tested to 
determine whether the impurities can affect 
the concrete strength development. Based on 
this there is need to investigate the properties 
of the Faskari Earth Dam Water and its effect 
on fresh properties and compressive strength 
of  concrete. 
Water in concrete 
After mixing and placement, concrete los es 
its plasticity, solidifies and hardens due to a 
chemical reaction known as hydration. For 
concrete production, hydration occur s when 
water reacts with the cement, thus b inds the 
aggregates together and eventually forming a 
stone like material (Isabella, 2015). This 
reaction is responsible for the properties and 
quality of the final concrete. Hence, the 
quality of the cement paste determines the 
characteristics of concrete. Also the strength 
of the paste, in turn, depends on the mixing 
water and water ceme nt ratio (Sahu, 2004). 
High quality concrete is produced by 
lowering the water -cement ratio, provided 
the concrete is properly mixed, placed, 
consolidated and cured.  Thus, the quantity of 
water should be adequate to initiate hydration 
and give adequate workability (Shetty, 2005). 
Cement requires time to fully hydrate before 
it acquires expected strength and hardness, 
thus concrete must be cured once it has been 
placed for optimum hydration. Curing is the 
process of keeping concrete under a specific 
environmental condition until hyd ration is 
relatively complete (Tsivilis, 2000). Water is 
very essential for this process, thus quality of 
water for this process has to be ensured. 
Moreover, the quality of water can further 
affect some important properties of concrete, 
such as setting time, workability, 
compressive strength and durability (Nikhil 
et al, 2014). Generally, water which is fit for 
drinking may be considered suitable for 
making concrete. However, some water may 
not be fit for drinking but suitable for use in 
concrete.  
--- PAGE 3 ---
An assessment of the effect of Faskari Dam water 
52 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
In order to define the quality of water for 
making concrete, it is necessary to 
understand the effects of various impurities 
on the concrete properties. Excessive 
impurities in water for mixing and curing of 
concrete affect not only its setting time but 
also its strength, workability and durability. 
Based on this, Neville (2006) recommended 
some limits of impurities of water to be 
tolerated for concrete production. 
Neville (2006) opined that water with pH 
range of 6.0 to 8.0 is good for concreting. 
Furthermore, mixing water with high content 
of suspended solids needs to be tested before 
use in concrete work. According to ASTM 
C1602 (2018) compressive strength and 
setting time are the concrete performance 
requirements of mixing water. Natural waters 
that are slightly acidic are harmless, but water 
containing humus or organic acids may 
adversely affect the hardening of concrete 
(Neville, 1996).  Chatveera et al  (2006) 
observed that the use of recycled sludge 
water as mixing water for concrete reduces 
workability and strength of concrete. Su et. al 
(2002) investigate the effect of various types 
of mixing water on the properties of mortar 
and concrete and reported that wash water is 
good for concrete mixing. 
However, the basic requirement of water for 
concrete is that it should be fit for drinking. 
The question that comes to mind is the 
availability of potable water for concrete 
work. But in developing countries like 
Nigeria, only a few percent of the populace 
has access to adequate potable water for their 
domestic consumption. This implies that it 
will be difficult for an average contractor to 
afford potable water in construction works 
(concrete) all the time. Therefore, there is a 
need to investigate the suit ability of the 
alternative sources of water for concrete 
production. 
 
 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Materials 
Water: Two water samples were used for the 
research. Public tap water fit for drinking  as 
a control sample  and Faskari Earth Dam 
Water  as test s pecimen. Faskari Earth Dam 
Water was collected at the point where the 
water is more disturbed.  
Cement: The cement used was Dangote 
brand of Portland Limestone.  
Clean air -dried river sand  obtained from 
Shika area was used as fine aggregate.  
crushed granite stones of 20mm maximum 
size were used as coarse aggregates.  
Methods 
Physical properties of the water were 
investigated by observations  as shown in 
Table1. Chemical analysis of water sample 
from the Faskari Earth Dam was carried out 
in the Multi User Research Laboratory of 
Department of Chemistry, Ahmadu Bello 
University Zaria  the result is presented in 
Table 2.  Initial and final setting time of the 
cement were tested using both tap water and 
Faskari earth Dam water by use of vicar 
apparatus in accordance with NIS 447 (2003) 
and ASTM 191 (2004) provisions  the result 
shown in Table 3. 
For the production of the concrete ratio 1:2:4 
was adopted for the concrete mix. Also , 
materials were batched by weight, mixed and 
compacted manually. For both the control 
and test samplea concrete mixes, workability 
test was carried out by use of slump test based 
on ASTM 143 (1994) guidelines. Slump test 
was carried out in the Laboratory of 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello 
University Zaria. Forty numbers (40) of 
100mm x 100mm x 100mm co ncrete cubes 
where produced, cured and tested for 
compressive strength test at 7 days, 14 days 
21 days 28 days. At each testing period five 
(5) cubes were selected and crushed.  The 
compressive strength test result is on Figure 
1.  
 