--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 15, No 1, (2022) 72 – 82     
  
COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF CONSTRUCTION MANAGERS 
INVOLVEMENT IN SMALL AND LARGE BUILDING PROJECTS 
 
DAVID Joel Ufwai1, MSHELGARU Isa Hassan1, MUHAMMAD Shehu1 
1Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria. 
Correspondence: bldrjoeldavid@gmail.com,  
 
ABSTRACT 
The level of construction managers' involvement in carrying out their roles influence the 
outcome of a building project However; previous studies have not adequately explored 
the extent to which construction managers' involvement varies across projects of different 
sizes. The aim of the study is to evaluate the extent of construction managers' involvement 
in executing their roles across different phases of small and large-scale building projects. 
Quantitative research method was  adopted to  qualify respondents ' views using close -
ended questionnaires. The population consists of  project managers, human resource 
managers and construction managers, from the 85 construction firms across the six area 
councils of Abuja. A sample size of 50 was determined using Cochran’s equation. The 
questionnaire items were measured on a 5 -point Likert Scale. Data collected was 
analysed by computing the mean item score (MIS ) and ranked based on the mean item 
score obtained. The findings indicate that the extent of construction manager s 
involvement across the phases of small-scale building projects has limited engagement  
(MIS = 3.4) to high (MIS = 3.5).  While in large scale building projects, their involvement 
is significantly higher (MIS = 4.0 to 4.2). The study concludes that the extent of 
construction managers involvement in small scale building project is moderate compared 
with the high extent in large scale building projects. The study recommen ds that 
construction organisations should develop training that focus on the challenges a nd 
requirements peculiar to building projects of different sizes, and enlighten construction 
managers on the expectations associated with building projects of different sizes.  
 
 
 KEYWORDS: Building Projects, Construction Managers, Involvement, Large -scale, 
Small-scale  
 
INTRODUCTION 
The construction industry is faced with 
so many challenges among which is 
inability of construction managers 
effectively carry out their roles  
(Ogunsanmi, 2016; Eja & Ramegowda, 
2020 and Ravi, John, Mohammed. 
Hashem, 2022).  According to Kang, 
Jin, Hyun & Park (2018), the level of 
construction managers' involvement in 
carrying out their roles influence the 
outcome of a building project. 
Construction managers' involvement in 
a building project is vital such that their 
absence results in lack of conformity 
with specified standards. When building 
project is larger, the requirements of the 
construction manager increases in such 
cases, a builder is required  to assist the 
construction manager (Anyanwu, 
2013). 
In the construction of buildings, contracting 
methods such as design -and-build, 
construction managements, guaranteed 
maximum price and management contracts 
allows for construction managers to be 
involved at the early stage of a building 
project (Greg, 2018).  Construction 
managers are site based managers of 
construction o rganisations with 
professional training in the management, 
--- PAGE 2 ---
David et al. 
73 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
production and delivery of Building 
projects in accordance to the objecti ves 
(Chartered Institute of Building CIOB, 
2013). According to Zidane (2012),  as 
projects vary  in sizes, so do construction 
managers’ involvement in carrying out their 
roles effectively.  
Previous research, as highlighted in 
Onyia (2019), indicates that the 
effectiveness of construction managers 
can be improved through skill 
development. This finding is consistent 
with Kang, Jin, Hyun, and Park, (2018), 
who demonstrated that skills affect the 
level of involvement of construction 
managers in executing their roles, 
ultimately impacting the results of 
building projects. Nevertheless, these 
studies have not adequately explored the 
extent to which construction managers' 
involvement varies across projects of 
different sizes. The aim of the study is to 
evaluate the extent of construction 
managers' involvement in executing 
their roles across different phases of 
small and large -scale building projects, 
and to identify how this involvement is 
influenced by project size. This was 
achieved through the following 
objectives; To analyze the roles and 
responsibilities of construction 
managers in small large -scale building 
projects, and t o quantify the level of 
involvement of construction managers 
in various p roject phases, including 
planning, execution, monitoring, and 
completion, for both small and large 
projects. 
The findings of the study will serve as 
management guidelines for construction 
organisations to focus their trainings and 
development on programs that enhance 
managerial effectiveness based on 
project size. To identify how 
construction managers ' involveme nt 
levels differ based on project scale. 
Furthermore, it can contribute to the 
existing literature by filling a gap in 
knowledge regarding the relationship 
between project size and managerial 
involvement. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
The Construction Manager 
According to the Chartered Institute of 
Building CIOB (2013) construction 
managers are site based managers of 
construction organisations with 
professional training in the 
management, production and delivery of 
Building projects in accordance to the 
objectives. A project manager as 
described in PMBOK (2013), is a 
professional assigned by a performing 
organization to lead a project team to 
achieve project objectives. Furthermore, 
in the construction of buildings, 
contracting methods such as design -
and-build, construction managements, 
guaranteed maximum price and 
management contracts allows for 
construction managers to be involved at 
the early stage of a building project 
(Greg, 2018). 
The Roles of Construction Managers 
Construction manager plays an important 
role in the leadership of a project team 
necessary in achieving the project’s 
objectives. Construction manager plays a 
key role throughout the project life cycle 
from its initiation phase through closing 
phase (Project Management Body of 
Knowledge PMBOK, 2013) . According to 
Shibani & Sukumar (2015),  a construction 
project manager has the responsibility of 
the planning, execution and closing of a 
project as their roles influence the project . 
Furthermore, construction project manager 
communicates with the upper  management 
level, client and external vendors, whose 
roles are the ability to hire, fire, supervise, 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Comparative evaluation of construction…. 
74 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
planning, setting goals , timely delivery, 
cost within budget , the dispute resolution , 
and risk management.  
Classification of Building Projects and 
Influence of Project Scale  
In the construction sector classifying 
construction projects is vital for structuring 
information such as project size 
classification. In managing construction 
works, knowing the project size is vital for 
the estimation and planning for each task of 
a project . Project classification helps to 
organize and define the various aspects of a 
project to enables managing of different 
types of projects (Josey & England, 2009).  
The sizing matrix for projects is classified 
as mega, large, medium and sm all-scale 
projects (Jos ey & England, 2009 ). 
However, Collins, Parrish and Gibson Jr 
(2017), classified the sizing matrix for 
projects within the context of building 
construction, as small- and large -scale 
construction projects
 
Table 1: Differences between small- and large-scale building projects 
S/n Small building project Large building project 
1 Less Cost < $100,000 (₦80 million) as at 
26/12/2022 
High Cost > $100,000 (above ₦80 million) as 
at 26/12/2022 
2 General liability insurance (low financial 
risk)< $1,200 (960,000) 
General liability Insurance (financial risk) ≥ 
$1,200 (₦960,000) per annum 
3 Duration < 6 months  Duration > 6 months 
4 Less Participants ˂ 10 team members More Participants > 10 team members 
5 End users < 25 persons End users > 25 persons 
(Burgan and Burgan, 2014; Collins, Parrish & Gibson, 2017; Glover, 2021). 
 
METHODOLOGY 
The research method adopted for this study 
was quantitative approach because, it 
enabled quantify or measure the 
perceptions of the respondent as numerical 
data. Having identified information from 
existing literature, it was presented to the 
respondents th rough a structured 
questionnaire (Onyia, 2019). The study was 
conducted across the six area councils of 
Abuja because being the capital city of 
Nigeria; Abuja hosts numerous 
construction firms who are engaged with so 
many construction projects of various sizes. 
This make construction managers  to be 
actively involved in the construction of 
buildings. Record obtained from the 
Federal Inland revenue Service has shown 
that 85 construction firms paid their taxes in 
the year. The 85 construction firms 
included both civil and building 
construction firms and are  small, medium 
or large construction firms (Technical Tax 
Office, Federal Inland Revenue Service 
Abuja, 2022).  The population consists of 
project managers, human resource 
managers and construction managers.  They 
were the respondents of the 85 construction 
firms from across the six area councils of 
Abuja. A sample size of 50 was determined 
using Cochran’s equation (1963 -1975). 
Cochran equation was adopted for the study 
because it suitably addressed the small 
population of the construction firms.  
Purposive sampling was used in the study  
because it  is suitable in  
qualitative research as it is mostly 
appropriate for small sample sizes where 
individuals who have the specific 
characteristics or knowledge (project 
managers and construction managers) 
needed to address the research question 
deliberately selected.  A structured 
questionnaire designed with closed ended 
questions was used  for collection of 
primary data. The data analysis adopted 
was descriptive statistics (measure of 
central tendency), where a  cumulative 
mean score was computed. A cumulative 
mean score of 3.5 represents the standard 
decision mean which indicates positive 
response or high extent on the question, if 