--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 16, No 1, (2023) 54 – 60    
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION OF THE MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF 
LATERITE BRICKS PRODUCED WITH PLASTIC WASTE AS BINDER 
KHALIL Ismail Muhammad1, ABADAKI Becky Oboro1, OKOLI Obumneme 
Godwin2. and GAMBO Sanusi1 
1Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria 
2Department of Building, Nnamdi Azikiwe University, Awka, Anambra State, Nigeria 
Correspondence: khalismail4ward@gmail.com  
ABSTRACT 
Three key issues bordering developing nations such as housin g deficit, waste management 
and depletion of environmental resources are rampant in Nigeria. Perhaps utilising plastic 
wastes as alternative materials, specifically in brick production, can be a viable approach to 
solving these issues. This paper seeks to apply plastic waste as a binder to completely replace 
cement with the view of producing Stabilised Earth Bricks. Laterite soil was combined with 
melted plastic to produce brick specimens. The specimens were cured in open air and tested 
for Densification (D f), Compressive Strength (C s) and Flexural Strength (Fs). An average 
compressive strength of 8.20N/mm² at 3 days was recorded for the  Laterite Plastic Bricks 
(LPBs). LPBs have been discovered to be light in weight yet possessing compressive strength 
comparable to standard requirements of Compressed Stabilised Earth Bricks. This indicates 
that LPBs can be considered as appropriate building materials. 
KEYWORDS: Alternative materials, Bricks, Laterite, Plastics, Waste management. 
 
INTRODUCTION  
Compressed Stabilised Earth Bricks 
(CSEBs) are considered as green building 
materials, which supports climate 
resilience and aligns with the global push 
for sustainable development  in Nigeria 
(Building, 2023). Plastic waste has gained 
recognition in the built environment where 
it serves as substitute to aggregates , 
workability modifier in  concrete, and 
binder in  sandcrete blocks/bricks  
production (Awoyera & Adesina, 2020) . 
Distinct from sandcrete blocks and fired 
clay bricks, it is economical to recycle 
waste products such as plastic water 
bottles with laterite for brick production 
because very little materials, tools and 
labour are required. The cost of 
transportation is eliminated as well since 
production can take place on site  (Khalil, 
2017). Compared to fired clay bricks, the 
production of Laterite Plastic Bricks 
(LPBs) would only involve melting plastic 
bottles at temperatures as low as 105 0C. 
Curing of LPBs is by air drying, thereby 
making the process less labour intensive 
and environmentally friendly. 
The largest industry across all economies 
and the biggest consumer of raw materials 
is the construction industry thus making it 
a potential sector where Plastic Waste 
(PW) can be used advantageously for a 
variety of purposes. Due to the beneficial 
properties of plastic, which include 
adaptability, light weight, hardness, and 
resistance to chemicals, water, and impact 
acclaimed by Amit, et al ., (2012) , the 
potential utilization of plastic waste in the 
construction sector will assist the sector in 
achieving its sustainability goals  
(Schwartz, 2012). 
--- PAGE 2 ---
Khalil et al. 
55 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
White, Franke, & Hindle, (2018), defined  
recycling as the process of turning waste 
materials into new materials that can be 
used to make new products after they have 
served their present and imminent use . 
Plastic recycling according to (Hopewell, 
Dvorak, & Kosior, 2019)  involves 
collecting instead of discarding plastic 
trash and putting it  through a series of 
processes to create new, usable goods . 
Effective recycling of plastic can decrease 
the need for landfill space and safeguard 
the environment from plastic pollution and 
emission of greenhouse gases  (Al-Salem, 
Lettieri, & Baeyens, 2019) . According to 
Isaac & Manasseh, (2020),  recycled 
polyethylene terephthalate (PET)  bricks 
can be fire resistant and bulletproof.  
Normally, water bottles and soft drink 
bottles are made up of PET  (Rishabh, 
Mohit, Inder, & Deepa, 2021). 
In developing countries such as Nigeria 
and Sudan to mention a few, there is an 
imbalance between the demands for 
housing and expensive conventional 
building materials coupled with the 
depletion of traditional ones  (Abolo, 
2019). To address this situation, attention 
has been focused on low -cost alternative 
building materials and methods. Plastic 
has been used  to stabilise sand in the 
production of interlocking paver s and 
walling bricks as well, however, sand is 
expensive and its acquisition may lead to 
depletion of the environment.  The 
machineries involved in the recycling and 
production of plastic bricks are also 
expensive that the poor cannot afford.  
Thus, this study improvises a local method 
of mixing laterite, which is  abundant and 
inexpensive in conjunction with plastic 
waste also cheaper and easy to acquire for 
the production of Compressed Stabilised 
Earth Bricks (CSEBs). This can go a long 
way to address the housing needs in 
developing nations  as well as provide a 
sustainable way to manage plastic wastes 
in the environment. 
 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Materials 
The materials used in the production of 
LPBs are the waste plastic water bottles 
made up of polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) capable of being molded and 
remolded repeatedly ; and laterite soil. 
Identical water Bottles of the same brand 
(Ever Table Water) bottles were sorted, 
washed to remove impurities and dried.  
The laterite soil was obtained from a 
borrow pit about 2 metres below ground 
level in Area G Samaru Campus, Ahmadu 
Bello University Zaria and subjected to 
preliminary e ngineering property tests 
such as sieve analysis (SA), moisture 
content (MC) bulk density (BD), and 
specific gravity (SG). The laterite was then 
batched to obtain a consistent soil mix for 
brick production. 
Methods 
LPBs production made use of a few 
improvised common tools. These are: 
1. A 5kg gas burner 
2. A large size aluminium cooking 
pot 
3. A 25kg stirring/compaction iron 
rod 
4. The ELE International – three gang 
mould (50mm cube) 
Preliminary Tests Results 
The relationships between the specific 
gravities ( 2.38:1.38) and bulk densities 
(1703:1398); (Laterite to Plastic) 
respectively, are close, table 1, thus mix 
proportions were carried out by weight. 
 
 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Experimental evaluation.…. 
56 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
Table 1: Specific Gravity (SG) and Bulk Density (BD) Results 
SN Material D (kg/cn3) 
Laterite 
Plastic 
SG BD  
1. 2.38 1703  
2. 1.38 1398  
NOTE: SG = Specific Gravity; BD = Bulk Density 
Trial Mixes 
In the preparation of sandcrete brick or 
block mortar, cement to sand ratio is 
usually in the ratio 1:6. Although, ratios of 
1:3; 1:4 and 1.5 have worked according to 
Uche, Oko, & Martin, (2022) for 
cement/sand mortars, there are no records 
for plastic/laterite proportions as at now. 
Hence, trail tests were necessary so as to 
achieve a consistent sticky mix for the 
production of LPBs. As shown in table 2, 
the weights in grammes of plastic were 
varied while keeping the weights of 
laterite and final melting temperatures 
constant. 
Table 2: Mix Proportions 
SN Materials Content in a Mould IMP (0C) Liquid State 
(0C) 
Remarks 
Ratio P (g) L (g) 
1 1:10 22.5 225 68 300 Un-sticky Mix 
2 1:5 45 225 68 300 Partially Sticky Mix 
3 1:4 56.25 225 68 300 Sticky brittle Mix 
4 1:3 75 225 68 300 Consistent Sticky Mix 
5 1:2 112.5 225 68 300 Fluidly Mix 
Note: P = Plastic; L = Laterite; IMP = Initial Melting Point 
From table 2, it can be observed that the 
ratio of plastic to laterite that produced 
consistent sticky mix, ideal for bricks 
production is 1:3. Ratios 1:10 t0 1:4 
produced weak binding effect on laterite 
while 1:2, turned out to be difficult to 
compact in the mould due to fluidity, 
hence the adoption of the 1:3 mix ratio. 
Laterite Plastic Bricks Production 
Process 
The empty metal pot provided for this 
work was pre-heated on the gas burner for 
about two minutes, after which plastic 
content of 22.5g representing 10% of the 
weight of laterite, was placed in the pot 
and allowed to completely melt into liquid 
state at 30 00C, which took nine minutes. 
The weighed laterite 225g, calculated for 
one mould, was then carefully introduced 
into the melted plastic and mixed 
thoroughly with the 25kg iron rod. When 
the mixture was observed to be consistent, 
the content of the pot was emptied into the 
mould and the same iron rod was used to 
tamp the mixture in the mould twenty-five 
times. Prior to this, engine oil was applied 
to the inside surfaces of the mould before 
each casting. This was to prevent the 
specimen from sticking to the sides of the 
mould during extrusion.  Every test 
specimen was left to cool and set for 
roughly fifteen minutes before de -
moulding and curing in open air. 
Trial Test Result 
After three days of open-air curing of 
specimens, the average compressive 
strengths for each ratio including the 
control samples are given in table 3. The 
lowest early strength at 3days 
(0.77N/mm2), was recorded for the control 
sample while the least strength 
(3.01N/mm2) for plastic stabilised bricks 
was measured at the ratio 1:10 and hence-
on, the strengths improved as plastic 
increased to 1:5; 1:4; and 1:3, (5.82; 7.26; 
and 8.20N/mm 2) in that order. The 