--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol 16, No 1, (2023) 61 – 73   
 
AN ASSESSMENT OF STAKEHOLDERS’ UNETHICAL PRACTICES IN 
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS 
OGUCHE Usman Joshua, MUHAMMAD Shehu1 and SAAD Mohammed 
Mustapha1  
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria  
 
Correspondence: usmanjoshuaoguche@gmail.com 
ABSTRACT 
Despite the existence of national building codes and regulatory bodies, unethical 
practices remain a national problem that has led to a surge in the number of building 
collapses, resulting in the loss of lives, and properties, and health and safety catastrophes 
that cause damage to the environment. The study assessed professionals' perceptions of 
stakeholders' unethical practices in building construction projects to mitigate the severity 
of the misconduct. The study is aimed at identifying the most common forms of unethical 
practices at the pre -construction and construction stages of building construction 
projects. The study used survey methods throu gh a structured questionnaire. P urposive 
sampling technique was used  and the sample size was 77 for the survey. The major 
findings at the pre -construction and construction stages are collusive tendering (bid 
rigging) at 4.70 (75.36%); bribery and cash inducement at 4.55 (68.12%); and illegal 
award of tender at 4.54 (65.22% ). At the construction stage, report falsi fication at 4.51 
(57.97%); non -adherence to welfare, health, and safety at 4.48 (56.07%); and 
overlapping and ghosting at 4.45 (56.07%). The study concluded that stakeholders should 
stand for their integrity due to the significance of the major findings recorded at the pre-
construction and construction stages of building projects . The study recommended that 
stakeholders should exhibit the hallmark of professional excellence by adhering to 
professional values to mitigate the severity of the misconduct.  
KEYWORDS: Bribery, Construction, Projects, Stakeholders and Unethical Practices 
INTRODUCTION 
Building industry has been facing growing 
concerns regarding ethical violations  despite 
the existence of the national building code and 
ethical knowledge among its stakeholders. 
Reports of misconduct continue to increase, 
calling into question the Poor strategic vision 
in the Nigerian construction sector that has 
subjected most construction participants to 
ethical violations ( Odole, 2018; Omange & 
Matawal, 2016). These acts not only result in 
colossal financial lo sses but also often in 
human liv es, such as in the case of deaths 
resulting from the collapse of sub -standard 
structures (CIOB, 2010). The enforcement of 
ethical standards is necessary to protect the 
credibility of the entire profession because 
lapses in ethical behaviour among 
construction stakeholders endanger the 
industry (Hamza at al., 2010).  
The construction industry is a significant 
player and a key driver of economic and 
employment growth in most countries, yet it 
faces a long list of negative ethical behaviours 
(Somachandra & Sylva 2018). The impact of 
unethical practices presents a strong case for 
mitigation, especially in the construction 
sector where the ethical violation is pervasive 
and complex among construction stakeholders 
at various levels. The divergent interests of 
these practitioners have led to unethical acts 
because of their di rect influence on 
construction projects (Aigbavboa at al., 2016; 
Adah, 2020).  Unethical act s within the 
construction industry are not limited to certain 
countries but are rather a global phenomenon 
(Lee and Cullen, 2018).  
Different studies  have attempted to find out 
issues related to unethical act s with limited 
studies on the most common forms of 
--- PAGE 2 ---
An assessment of stakeholders’.…. 
62 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
unethical practices at different stages of 
building construction projects The 
procurement process of construction is 
perceived to be very much susceptible to 
unethical practices than others stages 
(Abdulrazaq, 2021). Bribery is rated high and 
has been extensively associated with the 
tendering phase of the construction project 
process (Abdulrazaq, 2021; Chan and Owusu, 
2017). Therefore, a detailed study needs to be 
conducted on various stages to ascertain their 
unethical practices references.  
This research seeks to gain a deeper 
understanding of the issue s and offer insight 
that can lead to positive change by identifying 
the most ethical violations in building projects 
to develop recommendations for 
improvement. To address this challenge s, we 
need to unearth a sound framework through an 
empirical inquiry to provide a basis for guided 
action against unethical practices so that 
mitigation efforts are appropriately applied. 
Statement of the Problem 
The proliferation of unethical behaviours 
within building construction projects has 
precipitated a marked increase in building 
collapses, resulting in numerous fatalities, 
property losses, health and safety crises, and 
environmental harm (Somachandra & Syl va, 
2018; Aigbavboa at al., 2016). Le at al. (2014) 
identify unethical practices as a prevalent 
challenge in both de veloped and developing 
nations w hile various studies have identified 
the prevalence of unethical practices among 
stakeholders (Abdulrazaq, 2 021; Z ulu & 
Muleya, 2019; Ameh, 2018). There remains a 
dearth of empirical research that adequately 
pinpoints the most common forms of unethical 
acts at pre-construction and construction 
stages of projects. This gap undermines efforts 
to address unethical acts , which can 
detrimentally impact employee s well-being, 
the integrity of the built environment, and 
public trust in the construction industry. 
Hence, this study intends  to discern and 
categorise the most prevalent forms of 
unethical practices at the pre-construction and 
construction stage s of  building construction 
projects. 
Significance of the Study 
The misbehaviour and discrepancy between 
ethical obligations and actual behaviour in the 
construction sector are growing. With an 
emphasis on service delivery methods and 
orientation modalities, this study attempts to 
detect prevalent unethical activities among 
building stakeholders. Identifying 
vulnerabilities and setting priorities for 
immediate action, will be beneficial to all 
relevant stakeholders like academic 
researchers, professional bodies, practitioners, 
and students. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Stakeholders in the Construction Industry 
A stakeholder in an organization, according to 
Fremann (1984), is any group or individual 
who can affect or is affected by the 
achievement of the organization's project 
objectives. However, Stakeholders in 
construction are divided into internal 
stakeholders (primary stakeholders) and 
external stakeholders (secondary 
stakeholders) (Rajeev & Kothai, 2014). A 
construction stakeholder is an individual (or 
group of individuals) who has a significant 
impact on the success of a project 
(Muhammad. 2022). Stakeholder engagement 
in building production is more likely to be 
successful, especially in the long term, if it 
takes into consideration the expectations of the 
stakeholders and endeavours to meet their 
needs (Magassouba at al., 2019; Muhammad 
at al., 2022). Stakeholders can help or hinder a 
project based on their power and objectives to 
influence results by their concerns and 
expectations (Dağlı, 2018). 
Internal stakeholders are “the stakeholders 
who are formally members of the project 
coalition and usually support the project." The 
concept of internal stakeholders is oftentimes 
used with the concepts of primary and direct 
stakeholders. Direct stakeholders are formally 
members of the project coalition. That is, they 
are directly involved in an organization’s 
decision-making processes. Examples are 
clients, consultants, project managers, project 
management team, designers, subcontractors, 
suppliers, banks, sponsors, insurance 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Usman et al, 
63 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
companies, and external stakeholders  are not 
formal members of the project coalition but 
may affect or be affected by the project. Such 
groups are often referred to as secondary 
stakeholders. Examples are local 
communities, government, potential users, 
regulators, legal authorities, communit y 
representatives, nongovernmental 
organizations, research institutes, land owners, 
city councils, agencies or licensing bodies, 
unions, competitors, and employees 
(Magassouba at al., 2019; Muhammad at al., 
2022). 
Figure 1 Stakeholder model 
Source: (Cleland, 1986) 
Overview of Unethical Practices in the 
Construction Industry 
Unethical practices are one of the major 
impediments to the development of 
developing countries and infringe on the 
quality of life in developed countries 
(Akinrata, 2019). The existence of unethical 
practices within the construction industry is a 
global phenomenon (Lee & Cullen, 2018). The 
occurrence of unethical acts  cuts across all 
countries, and no construction project is 
immune to unethical practices (Stansbury & 
Stansbury, 2018). 
A company’s success and sustainability may 
be negatively affected when strategies and 
policies put in place fail to address unethical 
practices (Ukessays, 2017). Corrupt practices 
are found in every phase of a building project 
(Zulu & Muleya, 2019; Abdulrazaq, 2021). 
Ethical infringement causes certifiable issues 
for owners (Akinrata, 2019; Adah, 2020). A 
company’s success and sustainability may be 
negatively affected when ethical strategies and 
policies put in place fail to curb  unethical 
practices (UK Essays, 2017). This can only be 
reduced through strict a nd rigid rules and 
regulations. Since the building profession has 
a direct effect on the lives of people, these 
professionals owe special moral responsibility 
to the public and society rather than only their 
clients. Babatunde and Pheng (2015) 
expressed that unethical conduct is taking a 
developing toll on the notoriety of the industry 
around the world. 
Organizational expenditures in the recent 
decades recorded by the U.S. alone have been 
up to $70 billion and over $130 billion 
worldwide on leadership and ethical training 
annually (O'Leonard, 2014), yet U.S. 
companies still lose approximately $52 billion 
per year to employee theft (Gino, 2015). 
Evidence of misconduct is found in developed 
and many developing countries like Australia 
(Brown & Loosemore, 2015), South Africa 
(Aigbavboa at al ., 2016), and Nigeria 
(Adeyemo and A made, 2016 ). According to 
CIOB (2015), corruption and wrongdoing may 
always exist. By nature, it is very hard to 
eradicate, but it must be leaned against 
continuously through developing 
transparency, meaningful  discipline, and 
punishment. (Mihelic at al., 2010).  
Common Unethical Practice Forms in 
Construction Firms 
Bribery and Inducement: Manu at al. (2019) 
explained bribery as the “offering, giving, 
receiving, or soliciting of anything of value to 
influence the action of an official in the 
 
