--- PAGE 1 ---
Construction Focus, Vol. 16, No1 (2023) 74 – 86                  
UTILISATION OF BUILDING INFORMATION MODELLING CAPABILITIES IN 
SMALL BUILDING PROJECTS 
 
ISHAQ Ziyadul Hassan1, LAWAL Yarima Sallau1, CHARLES Sunday Edidiong1,  
ISAH Ibrahim1, ABDULRAZAQ Abdullahi Taiwo2 
 
1 Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria. 
2 Building Department, Ladoke Akintola University of Technology, Ogbomosho, Nigeria. 
 
Correspondence: ziyadishaq2@gmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT 
Building Information Modelling (BIM) has emerged as a transformative force in the 
construction industry, promising improved project efficiency, cost savings, and enhanced 
collaboration. However, empirical studies to assess the utilisation  of BIM capabilities are 
still lacking. This study assesses utilisation of BIM capabilities in small building projects. 
Quantitative research method comprising questionnaire survey was used for this study. Data 
was obtained using close ended structured questionnaires distributed to 53 professionals in 
built environment. Descriptive statistic (frequency, mean and standard deviations) and 
Inferential statistics (Kruskal-Wallis test) were used to analyse the data.  Findings revealed 
a high level of awareness of construction professionals regarding the benefits of BIM, with 
‘accurate visualisation of design ’ (MS=4.68), ‘project quality enhancement ’ (4.54) and 
‘faster project delivery’ (4.52) being the most recogni sed benefits. the findings of the study 
further revealed that,  the utilisation of BIM capabilities in small projects varies, with 
capabilities like ‘design visualisation’ (3.68), finding widespread use, while others, such as 
‘achieving energy efficiency and sustainability’ (1.76), lags behind. Moreover, the findings 
also revealed that  lack of government support or incentives (4.80), high cost of BIM 
implementation (4.76), and limited digital education and training (4.50) to be the significant 
barriers to utilisation of BIM capabilities . The study conclude s that there is a moderate 
utilisation of BIM capabilities in small building projects. The study recommends that public 
and private organisations in the construction sector should provide support to train and 
upskill construction professionals on BIM tools to drive  its successful utilisation in 
construction projects. 
 
KEYWORDS: Barriers, BIM capabilities, Building Information Modelling (BIM), Small 
building projects, Utilisation,  
 
INTRODUCTION 
In the rapidly evolving construction 
industry, the adoption of Building 
Information Modelling (BIM) has 
emerged as a transformative approach to 
project management and collaboration. 
BIM represents a digital representation of 
a building's physical and functional 
characteristics, integrating design, 
construction, and operation, offering 
stakeholders improved project efficiency 
and reduced errors (Eastman, 2011). BIM 
is also seen as a means to consolidate 
building information into a single, 
collaborative platform, addressing the 
limitations of previous CAD technologies.  
The adoption of BIM has been recognised 
as a key factor in managing project 
--- PAGE 2 ---
 Ishaq et al. 
75 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
information, complexity, and risk within 
supply chains, improving decision -
making, and facilitating effective 
information sharing among project 
partners (Vidalakis et al. , 2020) . This 
approach provides a single repository for 
multidisciplinary construction and design 
documents, streamlining data 
administration throughout the entire 
project lifecycle. 
The adoption rate and utilisation of BIM is 
not rapid, and so many countries and firms 
are still struggling with its adoption and 
utilisation in construction projects. The 
adoption rate of developed countries is 
faster than that of developing countries 
(Jung and Lee, 2015). In surveys by 
McGraw Hill (Construction, 2015), there 
has been an increase in BIM adoption in 
the United Kingdom, France and 
Germany, and North America. Similarly, 
the National BIM report (NBS, 2017) has 
advocated that the adoption and of BIM in 
the United Kingdom has increased from 
13% in 2011 to 60% in 2017. BIM 
adoption in developed countries such as 
the United Kingdom, United States, Hong 
Kong, China, Australia, Norway, Finland, 
Denmark, and Malaysia enjoys strong 
government support ( Wong et al . 2011); 
but this is not the case in developing 
countries such as Nigeria and Ghana 
where there is often a lack of government 
support and guidance for technologies 
such as BIM (Abubakar et al., 2014) 
In Nigeria, Abubakar et al , (2013) 
investigated the readiness of Building 
Design firms and contracting 
organisations to adopt BIM and have 
reported them to be appreciably ready.  
Abubakar et al, (2014) also identified the 
barriers and drivers of BIM adoption in 
Nigerian construction industry.  However, 
despite some readiness assessments, 
there's a lack of empirical study  that 
explored the extent of utilisation of BIM 
capabilities in small building projects in 
Nigeria. Small building projects are 
projects generally characterised by a 
combination of factors related to having 
low budget, short duration, minimal 
complexity, small project team and 
repetitive or standardised tasks.  The 
implementation of BIM starts from small 
projects, which if successful, then can be 
extended to large building projects.  
Therefore, exploring the utilisation of BIM 
capabilities in these small projects 
becomes crucial for successful BIM 
implementation in  the Nigerian 
Construction Industry.  Thus, the 
objectives of this study are therefore, to: 
1. assess professionals’ awareness of BIM 
capabilities and  
2. assess the utilisation of BIM capabilities 
in small Building projects 
  
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
This study adopted a quantitative research 
approach. A closed ended s tructured 
questionnaire was used to collect data  for 
the study. The questionnaire was designed 
in four sections. Section A solicited 
information regarding the demography of 
the respondents, Section B assessed the 
level of awareness of construction 
professionals on the benefits of BIM using 
a 5-point Likert scale  where 1 represents 
very low level of awareness and 5 
represents very high level of awareness . 
Section C determined the extent of 
utilisation of BIM capabilities in small 
building projects on a 5-point Likert scale 
where 1= to very low extent on one end 
and 5= to very high extent on the other 
end. Section D assessed the barriers to 
BIM utilisation in small building projects, 
also using a 5-point Likert scale where 1= 
strongly disagree on one end and 5= 
strongly agree on the other end.  
The population of the study includes 
construction professionals that handled 
--- PAGE 3 ---
Utilisation of building information modelling… 
76 | P a g e  
Construction Focus 
Department of Building, Ahmadu Bello University Zaria, Nigeria 
small building projects in FCT Abuja. The 
choice of professionals is for the fact that, 
they are directly involved in project 
implementation, from planning and design 
to execution and delivery. Furthermore, 
Abuja was selected as the study area 
because it i s one of the fastest -growing 
cities in the country and has a very high 
concentration of construction 
professionals. This can be attributed to the 
large quantity of construction works in the 
area (Ameh & Odusami, 2010).  
Due to unavailability of a single database 
to obtain a list of construction 
professionals that have handled small 
building projects in the study area from 
which accurate sample size could be 
drawn, the sample size for the research 
was then obtained using a sample size 
Table for non-finite population developed 
by Louangrath (2014) which says that the 
minimum sample size for an unknown 
population at 95% confidence interval 
with 5% error level is approximately 34 
counts. However, 40% of the estimated 
sample size was added to account for non-
responses. Therefore, a total of  53 
questionnaires were administered to 
construction professionals (Architects, 
Builders, Quantity surveyors, Structural 
and Services Engineers) in Abuja, Nigeria. 
50 properly filled and returned 
questionnaires (94.3%) were analysed.  
Descriptive statistics (Frequency, Mean, 
standard deviations and percentages) and 
inferential statistics  (Kruskal-Wallis H  
test) were used to analyse data. 
Section A of the questionnaire was 
analysed using frequency and percentages 
while section B , C and D were  analysed 
using mean values and standard deviation. 
Furthermore, Kruskal-Wallis test was used 
to determine the significance of difference 
in ratings across the respondents’ groups.  
Consequently, t he following hypothesis 
were postulated in this study. 
H01: There is no significant difference in 
the respondents’ ratings of the awareness 
of benefits of BIM 
H1: There is significant difference in the 
respondents’ ratings of the awareness of 
benefits of BIM 
H02: There is no significant difference in 
the respondents’ ratings of the Utilisation 
of BIM capabilities in small building 
projects 
H2: There is significant difference in the 
respondents’ ratings of the Utilisation of 
BIM capabilities in small building projects 
H03: There is no significant difference in 
the respondents’ ratings of the  barriers to 
Utilisation of BIM capabilities in small 
building projects 
H3: There is significant difference in the 
respondents’ ratings of the barriers to 
Utilisation of BIM capabilities in small 
building projects 
The r eliability of the questionnaire was  
also tested using internal consistency  test 
(Cronbach’s alpha Coefficient)  as seen in 
Table 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 